     Artificial Hivemind: The Open-Ended Homogeneity
             of Language Models (and Beyond)


     Liwei Jiang♠ Yuanjun Chai♠ Margaret Li♠ Mickel Liu♠ Raymond Fok♠
             Nouha Dziri⋆ Yulia Tsvetkov♠ Maarten Sap♢ Yejin Choi♡
                     ♠
                        University of Washington ♢ Carnegie Mellon University
       ⋆
           Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence ♣ Lila Sciences ♡ Stanford University
                                     lwjiang@cs.washington.edu
                 Code: https://github.com/liweijiang/artificial-hivemind
                  I NFINITY-C HAT Collection: liweijiang/artificial-hivemind



                                               Abstract
           Large language models (LMs) often struggle to generate diverse, human-like
           creative content, raising concerns about the long-term homogenization of human
           thought through repeated exposure to similar outputs. Yet scalable methods for
           evaluating LM output diversity remain limited, especially beyond narrow tasks
           such as random number or name generation, or beyond repeated sampling from
           a single model. To address this gap, we introduce I NFINITY-C HAT, a large-
           scale dataset of 26K diverse, real-world, open-ended user queries that admit a
           wide range of plausible answers with no single ground truth. We introduce the
           first comprehensive taxonomy for characterizing the full spectrum of open-ended
           prompts posed to LMs, comprising 6 top-level categories (e.g., creative content
           generation, brainstorm & ideation) that further breaks down to 17 subcategories.
           Using I NFINITY-C HAT, we present a large-scale study of mode collapse in LMs,
           revealing a pronounced Artificial Hivemind effect in open-ended generation of
           LMs, characterized by (1) intra-model repetition, where a single model consistently
           generates similar responses, and more so (2) inter-model homogeneity, where
           different models produce strikingly similar outputs. I NFINITY-C HAT also includes
           31,250 human annotations, across absolute ratings and pairwise preferences, with
           25 independent human annotations per example. This enables studying collective
           and individual-specific human preferences in response to open-ended queries. Our
           findings show that state-of-the-art LMs, reward models, and LM judges are less well
           calibrated to human ratings on model generations that elicit differing idiosyncratic
           annotator preferences, despite maintaining comparable overall quality. Overall,
           I NFINITY-C HAT presents the first large-scale resource for systematically studying
           real-world open-ended queries to LMs, revealing critical insights to guide future
           research for mitigating long-term AI safety risks posed by the Artificial Hivemind.


1   Introduction
Large language models (LMs) are the core backbone of modern AI systems but often fail to produce
the diverse, human-like creativity expected in open-ended tasks that do not have a ground truth answer
[88, 93, 92, 52]. This shortfall has sparked growing concerns about the long-term homogenization of
human thought, as users are repeatedly exposed to similar outputs [79, 10]. While ensemble methods
or model “swarms” have been proposed to enhance diversity [27, 25], their scalable evaluations of
diversity in real-world settings are still lacking [31]. Existing benchmarks often target stylized tasks

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
