                        Econometrica, Vol. 67, No. 4 ŽJuly, 1999., 827᎐874


         EXPERIENCE-WEIGHTED ATTRACTION LEARNING IN
                     NORMAL FORM GAMES

                      BY COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐HUA HO1


       In ‘experience-weighted attraction’ ŽEWA. learning, strategies have attractions that
    reflect initial predispositions, are updated based on payoff experience, and determine
    choice probabilities according to some rule Že.g., logit.. A key feature is a parameter ␦
    that weights the strength of hypothetical reinforcement of strategies that were not chosen
    according to the payoff they would have yielded, relative to reinforcement of chosen
    strategies according to received payoffs. The other key features are two discount rates, ␾
    and ␳ , which separately discount previous attractions, and an experience weight. EWA
    includes reinforcement learning and weighted fictitious play Žbelief learning. as special
    cases, and hybridizes their key elements. When ␦ s 0 and ␳ s 0, cumulative choice
    reinforcement results. When ␦ s 1 and ␳ s ␾ , levels of reinforcement of strategies are
    exactly the same as expected payoffs given weighted fictitious play beliefs. Using three sets
    of experimental data, parameter estimates of the model were calibrated on part of the
    data and used to predict a holdout sample. Estimates of ␦ are generally around .50, ␾
    around .8᎐1, and ␳ varies from 0 to ␾ . Reinforcement and belief-learning special cases
    are generally rejected in favor of EWA, though belief models do better in some
    constant-sum games. EWA is able to combine the best features of previous approaches,
    allowing attractions to begin and grow flexibly as choice reinforcement does, but reinforc-
    ing unchosen strategies substantially as belief-based models implicitly do.

       KEYWORDS: Learning, behavioral game theory, reinforcement learning, fictitious play.



                                       1. INTRODUCTION
HOW DOES AN EQUILIBRIUM arise in a noncooperative game? While it is
conceivable that players reason their way to an equilibrium, a more psychologi-



   1
     This research was supported by NSF Grants SBR-9511001, 9511137, 9601236, and 9730187, and
the hospitality of the Center for Advanced Study in Behavioral Sciences. We have had helpful
discussions with Bruno Broseta, Vince Crawford, Ido Erev, Dan Friedman, Dave Grether, Elef
Gkioulekas, John Kagel, Tom Palfrey, Matthew Rabin, Al Roth, Yuval Rottenstreich, Rajiv Sarin,
Rakesh Sarin, Dale Stahl, John Van Huyck, Roberto Weber, and an editor, and research assistance
from Hongjai Rhee, Chris Anderson, and Juin Kuan Chong. Barry Sopher generously provided data.
Many helpful comments were received from anonymous referees and seminar participants at the
Society for Mathematical Psychology conference in honor of Amnon Rapoport ŽJuly 1996., the
Russell Sage Foundation Summer Institute in Behavioral Economics ŽJuly 1996., the Economic
Science Association ŽOctober 1996., the Marketing Science Conference ŽMarch 1997., Bonn Confer-
ence on Theories of Bounded Rationality ŽMay 1997., FUR VIII in Mons, Belgium ŽJuly 1997.,
Gerzensee ESSET Economic Theory Conference ŽJuly 1997., BDRM ŽJune 1998., and seminars at
Caltech, Harvard, and Washington Universities, the Stockholm School of Economics, and the
Universities of Alicante, Autonoma, California ŽBerkeley, Los Angeles., Chicago, Pennsylvania,
Pittsburgh, Pompeu Fabra, Texas ŽAustin., and Texas A& M.

                                                827
828                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


cally plausible view is that players adapt or evolve toward it.2 The flurry of
recent research on adaptation and evolution mostly explores theoretical ques-
tions, such as to which types of equilibria specific evolutionary or adaptive rules
converge. We are interested in a fundamentally empirical question: Which
models describe human behavior best? In this paper we propose a general
‘experience-weighted attraction’ ŽEWA. model and estimate the model para-
metrically, using three sets of experimental data.
    The EWA model combines elements of two seemingly different approaches,
and includes them as special cases. One approach, belief-based models, starts
with the premise that players keep track of the history of previous play by other
players and form some belief about what others will do in the future based on
past observation. Then they tend to choose a best-response, a strategy that
maximizes their expected payoffs given the beliefs they formed.
    A different approach, choice reinforcement, assumes that strategies are
‘reinforced’ by their previous payoffs, and the propensity to choose a strategy
depends in some way on its stock of reinforcement. Players who learn by
reinforcement do not generally have beliefs about what other players will do.
They care only about the payoffs strategies yielded in the past, not about the
history of play that created those payoffs.
    The belief and reinforcement approaches have been treated as fundamentally
different since the 1950s. Until recently, nobody asked whether the two might be
related, or how. But like two rivers with a surprising common source, or children
raised apart who turn out to be siblings, belief and reinforcement are special
kinds of one learning model. The common heritage of these approaches was
probably not discovered earlier because reinforcement models were used pri-
marily by psychologists, and belief models primarily by decision and game
theorists. In addition, the information used by each approach is quite different.
Belief-based models do not specially reflect past successes Žreinforcements . of
chosen strategies. Reinforcement models do not reflect the history of how
others played. The EWA approach includes both as special cases by incorporat-
ing both kinds of information, using three modelling features.
    The crucial feature is how strategies are reinforced. In the choice reinforce-
ment approach, when player 1 picks strategy s1j , and player 2 picks s2k , player 1’s
strategy s1j is reinforced according to the payoff ␲ 1Ž s1j , s2k .. Unchosen strategies
s1h Ž h / j . are not reinforced at all. In EWA, the unchosen strategies are
reinforced based on a multiple ␦ of the payoffs ␲ 1Ž s1h , s2k . they would have
earned. This makes psychological sense because research on human and animal
learning shows that people learn from many kinds of experiences other than
those that are directly reinforcing. An expanded notion of reinforcement there-
fore liberates learning from the straitjacket of behaviorist psychology, toward
something more cognitive and descriptive of humans.
   2
     Like most good ideas in economics, the adaptive and evolutionary interpretations of equilibra-
tion have a long pedigree. Weibull Ž1997. pointed out that in Adam Smith’s famous passage where
he said that the division of labor emerged as a consequence of the ‘‘propensity to truck, barter, and
exchange,’’ Smith also noted that the division of labor emerged in a ‘‘very slow and gradual’’ way
Ž1981..
                             ATTRACTION LEARNING                                829

   The second EWA feature controls the growth rates of attractions. Attractions
are numbers that are monotonically related to the probability of choosing a
strategy. In cumulative reinforcement models attractions can grow and grow,
which implies that convergence can be sharper Žin the sense that choice
probabilities diverge toward one and zero.. In belief learning, attractions are
expected payoffs, which are always bounded by the range of matrix payoffs. The
EWA model allows growth rates to vary between these two bounds by using
separate decay rates, ␾ for past attractions, and ␳ for the amount of experience
Žwhich normalizes attractions ..
   The third modelling feature is initial attraction and experience weight. In
belief models initial attractions must be expected payoffs given prior beliefs. In
reinforcement models initial attractions are usually unrestricted. Therefore,
initial attractions are unrestricted in EWA too. The initial experience weight
N Ž0. reflects a strength of prior in belief models, or the relative weight given to
lagged attractions versus payoffs when attractions are updated.
   When ␦ s 0, ␳ s 0, and N Ž0. s 1, the EWA attractions of strategies are equal
to reinforcements, as used in many models. When ␦ s 1, and ␾ s ␳ Žand initial
attractions are determined by prior beliefs., the attractions of strategies are
equal to their expected payoffs given beliefs in a general class. That is, reinforc-
ing each strategy according to what it would have earned Žor did earn. is
behaviorally equivalent to forming beliefs, based on observed history, and
calculating expected payoffs. The equivalence holds because looking back at
what strategies earned Žor would have. in the past is the same as forming beliefs
based on what others did in the past, then computing forward-looking expected
payoffs based on those backward-looking beliefs.
   EWA tries to mix appropriate elements of reinforcement and belief learning
approaches in a way that makes sense. We think this can be judged by whether
the parameters have clear psychological interpretations, and whether adding
them improves statistical fit Žadjusting, of course, for added degrees of freedom.
and predictive accuracy. To test the empirical usefulness of EWA, we derived
maximum-likelihood parameter estimates from three data sets. The data sets
span a wide range of games: constant-sum games with unique mixed-strategy
equilibria; coordination games with multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria; and ‘ p-
beauty contests’ with unique dominance-solvable equilibria. Some empirical
studies have evaluated belief and reinforcement models, but most have not
compared them directly with statistical tests. Because EWA is a generalization
which reduces to belief and reinforcement learning when parameters have
certain values, it is easy to compare them to EWA and to each other.
   In the next section, the EWA approach is defined and we show how a general
class of choice reinforcement and adaptive belief-based approaches are special
cases. The third section provides interpretations of the model parameters and
discusses how they relate to principles of human learning. The fourth section
describes previous findings and shows how our empirical implementation goes
further than earlier work. The fifth section reports parameter estimates from
several data sets. The last section concludes and mentions some future research
directions.
830                          COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


              2. THE EXPERIENCE-WEIGHTED ATTRACTION ŽEWA. MODEL
    We start with notation. We study n-person normal-form games. Players are
indexed by i Ž i s 1, . . . , n., and the strategy space of player i, S i consists of m i
discrete choices, that is, Si s  si1 , si2 , . . . , sij, . . . , sim iy1 , sim i 4 . S s S1 = . . . = Sn is
the Cartesian product of the individual strategy spaces and is the strategy space
of the game. si g S i denotes a strategy of player i, and is therefore an element of
Si . s s Ž s1 , . . . , sn . g S is a strategy combination, and it consists of n strategies,
one for each player. syi s Ž s1 , . . . , siy1 , siq1 , . . . , sn . is a strategy combination of
all players except i. Syi has a cardinality of myi s ⌸ ks1,                     n
                                                                                       k / i m k . The scalar-
                                                       Ž            .
valued payoff function of player i is ␲ i si , syi . Denote the actual strategy
chosen by player i in period t by si Ž t ., and the strategy Žvector. chosen by all
other players by syi Ž t .. Denote player i’s payoff in a period t by ␲ i Ž si Ž t ., syi Ž t ...
    EWA assumes each strategy has a numerical attraction, which determines the
probability of choosing that strategy Žin a precise way made clear below..
Learning models require a specification of initial attractions, how attractions are
updated by experience, and how choice probabilities depend on attractions.


                                   2.1. The EWA Updating Rules
   The core of the EWA model is two variables which are updated after each
round. The first variable is N Ž t ., which we interpret as the number of ‘observa-
tion-equivalents’ of past experience. The second variable is A ij Ž t ., player i’s
attraction of strategy sij after period t has taken place.
   The variables N Ž t . and A ij Ž t . begin with some prior values, N Ž0. and
  jŽ .
A i 0 .These prior values can be thought of as reflecting pregame experience,
either due to learning transferred from different games or due to introspection.
ŽThen N Ž0. can be interpreted as the number of periods of actual experience,
which is equivalent in attraction impact to the pregame thinking..
   Updating is governed by two rules. First,

Ž 2.1.       N Ž t . s ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1 . q 1,     t G 1.

The parameter ␳ is a depreciation rate or retrospective discount factor that
measures the fractional impact of previous experience, compared to one new
period.
  The second rule updates the level of attraction. A key component of the
updating is the payoff that a strategy either yielded, or would have yielded, in a
period. The model weights hypothetical payoffs that unchosen strategies would
have earned by a parameter ␦ , and weights payoffs actually received, from
chosen strategy si Ž t ., by an additional 1 y ␦ Žso they receive a total weight of 1..
Using an indicator function I Ž x, y . that equals 1 if xs y and 0 if x/ y, the
weighted payoff can be written as w ␦ q Ž1 y ␦ . ⭈ I Ž sij, si Ž t ..x ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij, syi Ž t ...
  The rule for updating attraction sets A ij Ž t . to be the sum of a depreciated,
experience-weighted previous attraction A ij Ž t y 1. plus the Žweighted. payoff
                                             ATTRACTION LEARNING                                                     831

from period t, normalized by the updated experience weight:
                           ␾ ⭈ N Ž ty1 . ⭈ A ij Ž ty1 . qw ␦q Ž 1y␦ . ⭈ I Ž sij , si Ž t ..x ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž t ..
Ž 2.2.      A ij Ž t . s                                                                                              .
                                                                NŽ t .
   The factor ␾ is a discount factor or decay rate, which depreciates previous
attraction.

                                           2.2. Choice Reinforcement
  In early reinforcement models Žand some recent ones. choice probabilities are
updated directly Že.g., Bush and Mosteller Ž1955.; cf. Cross Ž1983... In more
recent models ŽHarley Ž1981.; Roth and Erev Ž1995.., strategies have levels of
reinforcement or propensity that are incremented cumulatively by received
payoffs Žand perhaps normalized; Arthur Ž1991... We emphasize the latter
cumulative form, which gives more modelling freedom3 and avoids some clumsy
technical features Že.g., imposing boundary conditions so probabilities do not
grow above one or below zero..
  The initial reinforcement level of strategy sij of player i is R ij Ž0.. These initial
reinforcements can be assumed a priori Žbased on a theory of first-period play.
or estimated from the data. Reinforcements are updated according to two
principles:

Ž 2.3.      R ij Ž t . s
                            ½   ␾ ⭈ R ij Ž t y 1 . q ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž t ..
                                ␾ ⭈ R ij Ž t y 1 .
                                                                               if
                                                                               if
                                                                                     sij s si Ž t . ,
                                                                                     sij / si Ž t . .

   The two principles can be reduced to a single updating equation:
Ž 2.4.      R ij Ž t . s ␾ ⭈ R ij Ž t y 1 . q I Ž sij , si Ž t .. ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž t .. .
It is easy to see that this updating formula is a special case of the EWA rule,
when ␦ s 0, N Ž0. s 1, and ␳ s 0. Thus, cumulative choice reinforcement in this
form is a special case of experience-weighted attraction learning.4
   Other reinforcement models assume that previous payoffs are averaged,
rather than cumulated ŽMcAllister Ž1991., Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1994, 1997.,
   3
     In the Cross model, strategies have utilities that are weighted averages of past utilities and
current payoffs Žfor chosen strategies ., and players maximize utility. Sarin Ž1995. shows that when
the weight on current payoff declines over time, this model behaves similarly to the Harley version
in which attractions grow. The similarity reflects the fact that both models build in a declining effect
of marginal reinforcements.
   4
     Some reinforcement models add other parameters. Roth and Erev Ž1995. add a parameter that
cuts off attractions close to zero, to avoid negative attractions. Erev and Roth Ž1997. add three
parameters that allow reinforcement to depend on payoffs minus an Župdated. reference point Žas in
Bush and Mosteller Ž1995., Cross Ž1983.., where the updating may be different for losses and gains.
They also add a parameter that smears a portion of the chosen-strategy reinforcement to neighbor-
ing strategies, to reflect a kind of experimentation or generalization that is Žlocally. similar to our ␦
parameter. Camerer and Ho Ž1998. compare the local-generalization specification with ␦ updating
in the EWA model and find that local-generalization fits much worse.
832                           COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


Sarin and Vahid Ž1997... Then reinforcements are updated according to
Ž 2.5.      R ij Ž t . s ␾ ⭈ R ij Ž t y 1 . q Ž 1 y ␾ . I Ž sij , si Ž t .. ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž t .. .
When ␦ s 0, N Ž0. s 1rŽ1 y ␳ . and ␳ s ␾ , EWA reduces to this averaged-
reinforcement form.

                                         2.3. Belief-based Models
   In a belief-based model, players tend to choose strategies that have high
expected payoffs given beliefs formed by observing the history of what others
did. While there are many ways of forming beliefs, we consider a fairly large
class of weighted fictitious play models, which include familiar ones like ficti-
tious play ŽBrown Ž1951.. and Cournot Ž1960. best-response as special cases Žsee
Fundenberg and Levine Ž1995, 1998., Cheung and Friedman Ž1997...5
   In the weighted fictitious play model, prior beliefs of opponents’ strategy
combinations are expressed as a ratio of hypothetical counts of observations of
                         k                   k Ž .
strategy combination syi   , denoted by Nyi     0 . These observations can then be
naturally integrated with actual observations as experience accumulates. ŽCarnap
Ž1962. shows an elegant set of axioms that implies this structure, which corre-
sponds to Bayesian updating with a Dirichlet-distributed prior.. In our view,
specifying prior beliefs Žand computing initial expected payoffs based on the
prior. is a crucial feature of belief models, though some papers have not
imposed this assumption. Without specifying a prior, there is no guarantee that
the updated beliefs that result from mixing initial expected payoffs with later
experience will be valid beliefs Ži.e., nonnegative probabilities that sum to one..
   We also allow past experience to be depreciated or discounted by a factor ␳
Žpresumably between zero and one.. Formally, the prior beliefs for player i
about choices of others are specified by a vector of relative frequencies of
                         k                k Ž .
choices of strategies syi  , denoted Nyi     0 . Call the sum of those frequencies
Ždropping the player subscript for simplicity. N Ž t . s Ý m        k Ž .
                                                             ks 1 Nyi t . Then the
                                                               yi

               k Ž .
initial prior Byi 0 is
                            k Ž .
                           Nyi 0
Ž 2.6.       k Ž .
            Byi 0 s        ,
                     N Ž0.
       k Ž .
with Nyi  0 G 0 and N Ž0. ) 0. Beliefs are updated by depreciating the previous
counts by ␳ , and adding one for the strategy combination actually chosen by the
other players. That is,
                                     k Ž
                                ␳ ⭈ Nyi  t y 1 . q I Ž syi
                                                        k
                                                           , syi Ž t ..
Ž 2.7.       k Ž .
            Byi t s                                                         .
                                         h Ž
                           Ý hs 1 ␳ ⭈ Nyi t y 1 . q I Ž syi
                             m yi                            h
                                                               , syi Ž t ..

   5
     When the description ‘fictitious play’ is used below, we mean traditional fictitious play in which
all past observations are weighted equally. Also, Crawford Ž1995. and Camerer and Ho Ž1998.
estimate models in which ␾ varies across periods, which generalizes weighted fictitious play to
include cases where the weight rises or falls over time. In both papers, allowing time-varying weight
does not improve fit very much, so assuming a fixed ␾ seems reasonable.
                                       ATTRACTION LEARNING                            833

Expressing beliefs in terms of previous-period beliefs,

                              k Ž
                                                 I Ž syi
                                                      k
                                                         , syi Ž t ..
                         ␳ ⭈ Byi  t y 1. q
                                                     N Ž t y 1.
Ž 2.8.     k Ž .
          Byi t s
                                                 1
                                     ␳q
                                            N Ž t y 1.
                     ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1 . ⭈ Byi
                                         k Ž
                                             t y 1 . q I Ž syi
                                                            k
                                                               , syi Ž t ..
                   s                                                        .
                                      ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1

   This form of belief updating weights observations from one period ago ␳
times as much as the most recent observation. This includes Cournot dynamics
Ž ␳ s 0; only the most recent observation counts. and fictitious play Ž ␳ s 1; all
observations count equally. as special cases. The general case 0 F ␳ F 1 is a
compromise in which all observations count but more recent observations count
more.
   Expected payoffs in period t, Eij Ž t ., are taken over beliefs according to
                        myi
Ž 2.9.    Eij Ž t . s Ý ␲ i Ž sij , syi
                                     k .    k Ž .
                                         ⭈ Byi t .
                        ks1

The crucial step is to express period t expected payoffs as a function of period
t y 1 expected payoffs. Substituting equation Ž2.8. into Ž2.9. and rearranging
yields:

                        ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1 . ⭈ Eij Ž t y 1 . q ␲ Ž sij , syi Ž t ..
Ž 2.10.   Eij Ž t . s                                                          .
                                        ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1

   This equation makes the kinship between the EWA and belief approaches
transparent. Formally, suppose initial attractions are equal to expected payoffs
given initial beliefs that arise from the‘experience-equivalent’ strategy counts
  k Ž .
Nyi  0 , so A ij Ž0. s Eij Ž0. s Ý m      Ž j k . k Ž .
                                   ks1 ␲ i s i , syi ⭈ Byi 0 . Then substituting ␦ s 1 and
                                     yi


␳ s ␾ into the attraction updating equation Ž2.2. gives attractions that are
exactly the same as updated expected payoffs in Ž2.10.. Hence, the weighted
belief models are a special case of EWA.
   The contrast with EWA makes clear that belief models actually make three
separate assumptions: Players’ initial attractions are expected payoffs based on
some prior; players update attractions using EWA with ␦ s 1; and attractions
are a weighted average of lagged attractions and payoffs Ž ␾ s ␳ .. We think the
most intuitively appealing assumption is the best-responsiveness to foregone
payoffs embodied in ␦ s 1, rather than the weighted-average restriction ␾ s ␳
or the restriction on first-period play. EWA allows one to separate the three
features of belief learning: Players could have attractions that begin and grow
differently than belief models assume, but update those attractions in a belief-
learning way. Such players are a special kind of EWA learner.
834                       COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


   The close relation between reinforcement and belief learning is surprising
because the two approaches have generally been treated as fundamentally
different Že.g., Selten Ž1991, p. 14... Some authors have extended choice rein-
forcement models to include reinforcement using all foregone payoffs ŽMcAllis-
ter Ž1991.. or the highest foregone payoffs ŽRoth Ž1995, pp. 37᎐40., Roth and
Erev Ž1995., on market games., without noticing that these extensions make
reinforcement like belief learning.
   Some connection between reinforcement and belief learning was recognized
very recently by others Žunbeknownst to us.. Fudenberg and Levine Ž1995, pp.
1084᎐1085. and Cheung and Friedman Ž1997, p. 54᎐55. both pointed out that
expected payoffs computed using fictitious play beliefs, and based on history, are
asymptotically the same as histories of actual payoffs. But their arguments are
based on long-run asymptotic equivalence between a stationary distribution
Žpossible payoffs. and a sample from it Žactual payoffs.. Neither explicitly
recognized that even in the short run, there is an exact equivalence between a
general kind of reinforcement learning ŽEWA. and weighted fictitious play.6
   The nonlinear interplay of parameters in the EWA updating rules is why, as a
model of human learning, EWA is potentially superior to simply running a
regression of choices against reinforcements and expected payoffs or combining
the two in a weighted average. Reinforcements and expected payoffs differ in
three crucial dimensionsᎏinitial attractions and experience weight N Ž0., the
weight ␦ on foregone payoffs in updating attractions, and whether attractions
can grow outside the bounds of possible payoffs Žwhich depends on ␾ and ␳ ..
EWA is not a convex combination of reinforcement and belief models because
these three dimensions are controlled by separate parameters. For instance, a
weighted average in which expected payoffs are given weight ␦ and reinforce-
ments have weight 1 y ␦ will update attractions like EWA does, but that
weighted average will not allow the wide range of initial attractions, experience
rates, and growth rates available in EWA.7


                                  2.4. Choice Probabilities
     Attractions must determine probabilities of choosing strategies in some way.
Pi j Ž t . should be monotonically increasing in A ij Ž t . and decreasing in A ki Ž t .
Žwhere k / j .. Three forms have been used in previous research: Exponential
Žlogit., power, and normal Žprobit.. In estimation reported below we use the

    6
      For example, Cheung and Friedman Ž1997. make their point by ‘‘assumwingx for the moment
Žvery counterfactually! ., that the player somehow managed to play both strategies each period.’’
Then ‘‘dropping the counterfactual,’’ they show that the average experienced payoffs will corre-
spond, up to some noise, to expected payoffs. Counterfactual simulation of foregone payoffs is
precisely the mental process invoked by ␦ in EWA. However, the ‘noise’ is correlated with past
observations that are included explicitly in EWA, so the relation between EWA and weighted
fictitious play is exact rather than approximate.
    7
      Indeed, Camerer and Ho Ž1998. show that EWA fits much better than a convex combination of
belief and reinforcement learning, in two coordination games.
                                            ATTRACTION LEARNING                                           835

logit function, which is commonly used in studies of choice under risk and
uncertainty, brand choice, etc. ŽBen-Akiva and Lerman Ž1985., Anderson, Palma,
and Thisse Ž1992.., and is given by

                                    e ␭⭈ A i Ž t .
                                             j


Ž 2.11.      Pi j Ž t q 1 . s                                .
                                        ␭⭈ A i Ž t . k
                                Ým
                                 ks 1 e
                                   i




   The parameter ␭ measures sensitivity of players to attractions. Sensitivity
could vary due to the psychophysics of perception or whether subjects are highly
motivated or not. In this probability function, the exponent in the numerator is
just the weighted effect of strategy sij ’s attraction, ␭ ⭈ A ij Ž t ., on the probability of
choosing strategy sij. Models in which cross-effects of attractions on other
strategies’ choice probabilities are allowed have been estimated ŽMookerjhee
and Sopher Ž1997.. but we do not have the degrees of freedom to do so.8
   The logit, power, and probit probability functions each have advantages and
disadvantages. The exponential form has been used to study learning in games
by Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1994, 1997., Ho and Weigelt Ž1996., and Fudenberg
and Levine Ž1998., and in ‘quantal response equilibrium’ models by Chen,
Friedman, and Thisse Žin press. and McKelvey and Palfrey Ž1995, 1998.. Cheung
and Friedman Ž1997. used the probit form. The exponential form is invariant to
adding a constant to all attractions. 9 As a result, negative values of A ij Ž0. are
permissible, which means one can avoid the difficult question of how to update
attractions when payoffs are negative.10
   The power probability form is given by

                                                         ␭
                                    Ž A ij Ž t ..
Ž 2.12.        jŽ
             Pi t q 1 . s                                    ␭
                                                                 .
                                Ým i Ž  k Ž ..
                                 ks 1 A i t


   8
     In Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1997., the exponent in the probability equation numerator is the
                                                                        kŽ .
sum of weighted effects of all the attractions, Ý m       hs 1 ␭ jk ⭈ A i t , where ␭ jk is the cross-effect of
                                                           i

strategy sik ’s attraction on strategy sij ’s score. This model allows cross-effects in which one strategy’s
attraction can affect other strategies’ choice probabilities differently. These cross-effects are hard to
interpret without knowing more about similarity of strategies or some other basis for one strategy’s
attraction to affect others differently. Nonetheless, they have some significance as a whole in the
Mookerjhee᎐Sopher analysis of constant-sum games. Estimating them for our median-action and
p-beauty contest data uses up far too many degrees of freedom because there are too many
strategies. Including cross-effects could proceed particularly efficiently if some structural considera-
tions were used to restrict coefficients a priori Žas in Sarin and Vahid’s Ž1997. use of strategy
similarity..
   9
    As a result, one must normalize A ijŽ0. to equal a constant for one value of j in order to identify
parameters. There is some evidence that adding a constant to payoffs does matter ŽBereby᎐Meyer
and Erev Ž1997.. but there is also evidence that logit fits better than power, so we regard the choice
of proper form as a matter of one’s purpose and yet-unresolved empirical debate.
   10
      Borgers and Sarin Ž1996. avoid this problem by adding x to all other strategies when a chosen
strategy loses x.
836                         COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


    The power form is invariant to multiplying all attractions by a constant.
Because of this invariance, the parameters N Ž0. and ␳ make no difference
when the power form is used Ži.e., they are not identified..11
    Depending on one’s purpose, being able to ignore N Ž0. and ␳ can be an
advantage or disadvantage. For the purpose of distinguishing different models, it
is a big disadvantage because models impose different restrictions on N Ž0. and
␳ . By using the power form, the difference between belief-based, reinforcement,
and EWA models, besides initial attractions, is only one parameter, ␦ , rather
than three parameters. For the purposes of estimating any one model reliably,
however, conserving degrees of freedom is good so the power form is better.
Since our main purpose in this paper is comparing models, having the extra tools
to distinguish theories is a large advantage so we use the logit form rather than
the power form. This choice of probability rule is, of course, not an essential
part of the EWA model.
    Ultimately, it is an empirical question whether the logit, probit, or power
forms fit better Žadjusting for degrees of freedom.. Previous studies show
roughly equal fits of logit and power ŽTang Ž1996., Chen and Tang Ž1998., Erev
and Roth Ž1997.. or better fits for the logit form over the power form ŽCamerer
and Ho Ž1998...


                             3. INTERPRETING EWA PARAMETERS
   We think it is crucial to ask how a learning model’s parameters can be
interpreted, what general behavioral principles of learning they capture, and, for
EWA, how they reveal the assumptions implicit in reinforcement and belief
learning. Asking these questions about any learning theory avoids the danger of
adding parameters just to improve statistical fit, without adding new insight or
respecting what is known in other disciplines. In addition, if parameters have
natural psychological interpretations they can be measured in other ways Že.g.,
response times and attention measures. and used in psychological modelling.


                     3.1. Learning Principles, Aspiration Le¨ els, and ␦
  The parameter ␦ measures the relative weight given to foregone payoffs,
compared to actual payoffs, in updating attractions. This is the most important
parameter in EWA because it shows most clearly the different ways in which
EWA, reinforcement and belief models capture two basic principles of learn-
ingᎏthe law of actual effect and the law of simulated effect.

   11
       The parameter ␳ disappears because it only appears in the updating equation denominator
␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1 that is common to all attractions and thus cancels out in the power form. Then EWA
attractions at time t depend only on recent payoffs and the product A ijŽ0. ⭈ N Ž0.. While initial choice
probabilities depend on A ijŽ0. only, these probabilities are the same as those that depend on
A ijŽ0. ⭈ N Ž0. Žfor N Ž0. ) 0.. As a result, multiplying the initial attractions by an arbitrary constant
makes no difference Žeconometrically, N Ž0. is not identifiable..
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                          837

   Many decades of learning experiments, mostly with Žnonhuman. animal
subjects, show that successful chosen strategies are subsequently chosen more
often. Behaviorist psychologists call this the ‘law of effect’ ŽThorndike Ž1911.,
Herrnstein Ž1970... We relabel this the ‘law of actual effect’ because behavior-
ists took it for granted for years that the only effect on subsequent choices was
produced by rewards for actual choices. The behaviorists eschewed ‘mentalist’
constructs like imagination, which allowed the possibility that foregone rewards
could affect the probability of choosing new strategies, until a series of demon-
strations showed that those cognitive constructs are necessary. When applied to
humans playing games with a known payoff matrix, it is sensible to propose a
corollary general principle, the ‘law of simulated effect’. The law of simulated
effect states that unchosen strategies that would have yielded high payoffsᎏ
simulated successes ᎏare more likely to be chosen subsequently. Many experi-
ments on reinforcement learning are consistent with this principle.12
   Furthermore, most research on human and machine learning assumes that
the basic process driving learning is not reinforcement, per se, but the reduction
of errors. Since errors are measured by the difference between what players
received and what they could have received, error-reduction algorithms effec-
tively use both actual payoffs and foregone payoffs.
   This error reduction idea also lies behind learning direction theory ŽSelten
and Stoecker Ž1986., Selten Ž1997... Learning direction theory presumes players
have a causal understanding of the game that enables them to tell in which
direction they should switch strategies.13 If players know strategies’ foregone
payoffs, then direction learning predicts they will move Žweakly. in the direction
of higher-forgone payoffs, and away from low foregone payoffs. This is essen-
tially the same prediction as EWA with ␦ s 1, except that the direction learning
allows inertia in responses, which corresponds to ␦ - 1 when payoffs are
positive.14 Thus, in our view EWA incorporates the intuition behind direction
learning in a precise way, when the causal structure is known, while direction
learning can more generally apply to situations with known causal structure Žbut
unknown foregone payoffs. in a way yet to be fully specified.
   The empirical strengths of the law of effect and the law of simulated effect
are the key to distinguishing different models of learning in games, and are

   12
      For example, anxious patients can be taught to fear a picture of a triangle Ža conditioned
stimulus, or CS. when it is followed by a loud annoying noise Žan unconditioned stimulus, or UCS..
When patients are told to simply imagine the UCS several times, their imagination increases the
strength of their conditioned fear response to the triangle CS ŽDavey and Matchett Ž1994... A
related phenomenon is ‘incubation’, in which presentation of the CS itself increases the fear
response ŽEysenck Ž1979... In these cases, people are not learning by direct reinforcement. They
‘learn’ by simply imagining either the UCS’s reinforcement, or the reinforcement that typically
follows a CS.
   13
      The players’ understanding could be expressed in a causal diagram or map, but this central part
of the theory is not yet developed.
   14
      When payoffs are negative, ␦ - 1 in EWA implies players will be likely to move away from
money-losing chosen strategies Žwhich are reinforced fully, and negatively., even moving to strategies
with larger negative Žforegone payoffs..
838                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


calibrated by ␦ . Reinforcement insists that only actual effects matter Ž ␦ s 0..
Belief models implicitly require that actual and simulated effects are equally
strong Ž ␦ s 1.. EWA takes the middle ground.
   The parameter ␦ could also be interpreted as creating an endogeneous
aspiration level against which payoffs are compared. Including an aspiration
level is sensible because many studies show that the reinforcement value of a
fixed payoff depends on the aspiration level to which the payoff is compared
Že.g.., Erev and Roth Ž1997...15
   In EWA, ␦ creates an adjustable aspiration level endogeneously. It is easy to
show that reinforcing strategies according to foregone payoffs means the proba-
bility of a chosen strategy si Ž t . only increases if its payoff is larger than ␦ times
the average foregone payoff, holding previous attractions constant Žsee our
working paper for details.. Therefore, one can interpret ␦ times the average
foregone payoff in each period as a kind of aspiration level. A larger ␦ creates a
higher aspiration level. Furthermore, the aspiration level adjusts automatically
over time, because it depends on the foregone payoffs in each period. EWA
therefore creates an endogeneous, adjustable aspiration level at no extra para-
metric cost.
   If ␦ is interpreted as the weight placed on foregone payoffs, many generaliza-
tions spring to mind. The size of the weight ␦ could depend on the size of the
foregone payoff or on its sign, to allow the possibilities that unusually large or
small foregone payoffs catch a player’s attention, or that players are more
sensitive to losses than to gains Žcf. loss-aversion in risky choices, e.g., Tversky
and Kahneman Ž1992... If players are more sensitive to foregone payoffs for
strategies that are closer to the chosen strategy, or more similar, then ␦ will
depend on the distance or similarity between each strategy and the chosen
strategy si Ž t . Žcf. Sarin and Vahid Ž1997...
   If ␦ is applied to others’ actual payoffs instead of own foregone payoffs, EWA
can be used to capture learning by imitation. Imitation is obviously common,
especially among animals, children, and impressionable teenagers. Payoff-
dependent imitation is also a sensible heuristic behavior in low-information
environments where players do not know what their foregone payoffs are, but
can observe success of other firms. EWA and imitation learning will be approxi-
mately the same when Ži. games are symmetric, so that another player’s payoffs
are the same as one’s own foregone payoffs, and Žii. when there are many
players who choose different strategies, so that a player who imitates others
according to how successful they were is effectively reinforcing a wide range of
her own strategies according to their foregone payoffs. We conjecture that these
are the conditions under which imitation is most common. If so, then imitation
is just a heuristic way to implement foregone-payoff-based updating Ža la EWA.,

  15
     Players who tend to repeat previously-chosen strategies, regardless of their outcomes, reveal a
‘status quo bias’ or ‘habit’ ŽMajure Ž1994., Tang, Ž1996... This habitual behavior of chosen strategies
can be captured by having an aspiration level that is always lower than the actual payoffs and by a
lack of simulated effect.
                                       ATTRACTION LEARNING                                                 839

using payoffs of others as the best available proxy for one’s own unknown
payoffs. In this sense, EWA captures some of the intuition underlying imitation,
and perhaps much of its empirical force as well.



                               3.2. Growth of Attractions, ␳ and ␾
   The parameter ␾ depreciates past attractions, A ij Ž t ..16 The parameter ␳
depreciates the experience measure N Ž t .. It captures decay in the strength of
prior beliefs, which can be different than decay of early attraction Žcaptured by
␾ .. These factors combine cognitive phenomena like forgetting with a deliberate
tendency to discount old experience when the environment is changing.
   One way to interpret ␳ and ␾ is by considering the numerator and denomina-
tor of the main EWA updating equation Ž2.2. separately, and thinking about
how reinforcement and belief-based models use these two terms differently. The
numerator is ␾ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. ⭈ A ij Ž t y 1. q w ␦ q Ž1 y ␦ . ⭈ I Ž sij, si Ž t ..x ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij, syi Ž t ... This
term is a running total of Ždepreciated. attraction, updated by each period’s
payoffs. The denominator is ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1. This term is a running total of
Ždepreciated. periods of experience-equivalence. Reinforcement models essen-
tially keep track of the running total in the numerator, and do not adjust for the
number of periods of experience-equivalence Žsince ␳ s 0, the denominator is
always one.. Belief-based models also keep track of the attraction total but
divide by the total number of periods of experience-equivalence. By depreciating
the two totals at the same rate Ž ␳ s ␾ ., the belief-based models keep the
‘per-period’ attractions Žexpected payoffs. in a range bounded by the game’s
payoffs.
   EWA allows attractions to grow faster than an average, but slower than a
cumulative total. An analogy might help illustrate. Instead of determining
attractions of strategies, think about evaluating a person Žfor example, an
athlete, or a senior colleague you might hire. based on a stream of lifetime
performances. The reinforcement model evaluates people based on Ždepreci-
ated. lifetime performance. The belief-based models evaluate people based on
‘average’ Ždepreciated. performance. Both statistics are probably useful in
evaluationᎏin hiring a colleague or an athlete, you would want to know lifetime
performance and some kind of performance averaged across experience. One
way to mix the two is to normalize depreciated cumulative performance by
depreciated experience, but depreciate the amount of experience more rapidly.
Then if two people perform equally well on average every year, the person with
10 years of experience is rated somewhere between equally as good and twice as
good as the person with five years of experience. When ␾ ) ␳ , EWA models
players who use something in between ‘lifetime’ performance and ‘average’
performance to evaluate strategies.

    A ‘primary effect’ Žor ‘imprinting’; Cheung and Friedman Ž1997.. in which early observations
   16

are remembered more strongly than recent ones, can be expressed by ␾ G 1.
840                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


   The depreciation rate parameters ␾ and ␳ can also be understood by how
they control slowdown in learning rate or sharpness of convergence. Solving
recursively for steady-state attraction levels shows that those levels equal the
ratio Ž1 y ␳ .rŽ1 y ␾ . times the steady-state average payoff. Thus, when ␳ s 0 as
in reinforcement learning, attractions can end up outside the bounds of payoff
levels Žand they grow as large as possible, holding ␾ constant.. When ␳ s ␾ , as
in belief-learning, steady-state attraction levels are equal to steady-state average
payoffs. The implication of these two possibilities depends on how attractions
determine probabilities. In the logit probability form, only differences in attrac-
tion levels affect choice probabilities. Therefore, given a fixed value of ␭,
attractions that can grow outside the bounds of payoff levels have a wider range
across strategies. This allows the possibility of sharper convergence in the sense
that choice probabilities can converge closer to the boundaries at zero and one.
When attractions are bounded to be close to payoff levels, convergence cannot
be as sharp. In the power probability form, only ratios of attraction levels
matter. Therefore, if attractions grow, the relative impact of new reinforcements
falls; learning slows down. Ceteris paribus, reinforcement learning requires
convergence to be as sharp as possible Žin the logit form. or requires learning to
slow down as quickly as possible Žin the power form., while belief learning
requires the opposite. EWA is able to choose an intermediate value of ␳ that
tailors the sharpness of convergence or rate of learning to the data.



                   3.3. Initial Attractions A ij Ž0. and their Strength N Ž0.
   The term A ij Ž0. represents the initial attraction, which might be derived from
an analysis of the game, from surface similarity between strategies and strategies
that were successful in similar games, etc. Belief models restrict the A ij Ž0.
strongly by requiring initial attractions to be derived from prior beliefs. This
requires, for example, that weakly dominated strategies will always have Žweakly.
lower initial attractions than dominant strategies. EWA allows more flexibility.
   For example, suppose players make first-period choices randomly, by choosing
what was chosen previously in a different game, by setting each strategy’s initial
attraction equal to its minimum payoff Žthe maximin rule. or maximum payoff
Žthe maximax rule.,17 or by choosing stochastically among selection principles
like payoff-dominance, risk-dominance, loss-avoidance, etc. All these decision
rules are plausible models of first-period play, but none of them generate initial
attractions that are always expected payoffs given some prior beliefs.
   We consider the scientific problem of figuring out how people choose their
initial strategies as fundamentally different than explaining how they learn.

  17
     Making a strategy’s initial attraction equal to its minimum payoff, for example, is implicitly
putting all the belief weight on the choices by others that yield that minimum. But the choices by
others that lead to minima for different strategies are likely to be different. So the implicit beliefs
underlying each attraction will be different.
                                         ATTRACTION LEARNING                                                    841

Leaving initial attractions unrestricted makes them numerical placeholders that
can be filled by a theory of first-period play that supplies attractions as an input
to EWA. That combination would be a complete theory of behavior in games,
from start to finish.
    The initial-attraction weight N Ž0. appears in the EWA model to allow players
in belief-based models to have an initial prior that has a certain strength
Žmeasured in units of actual experience.. In EWA, N Ž0. is therefore naturally
interpreted as the strength of initial attractions, relative to incremental changes
in attractions due to actual experience and payoffs. Fixing N Ž0. s 1 means that,
unit for unit, initial attractions A ij Ž0. and chunks of reinforcement from payoffs
are weighed equally when attractions are updated. This is easiest to see by fixing
␦ s 1 for simplicity and directly computing the attraction after two periods,
A ij Ž2., which gives

                         ␾ 2 ⭈ A ij Ž 0 . ⭈ N Ž 0 . q ␾ ⭈ ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž 1 .. ⭈ q ␲ i Ž sij , syi Ž 2 ..
Ž 3.1.    A ij Ž 2 . s                                                                                      .
                                                     ␳ 2 ⭈ N Ž0. q ␳ q 1

   The parameter ␾ captures the declining weight placed on payoffs from more
distant periods of actual experience, compared to more recent periods. ŽThat is,
the older period 1 payoff ␲ i Ž sij, syi Ž1.. is weighted by ␾ but the recent period 2
payoff ␲ i Ž sij, syi Ž2.. is not.. Like previous payoffs, the initial attraction is also
weighted by a power of ␾ Ž ␾ 2 , because it ‘happened’ two periods earlier., but is
also weighted by N Ž0.. Thus, the parameter N Ž0. captures the special weight
placed on the initial attractions, compared to increments in attraction due to
payoffs. N Ž0. can therefore be thought of as a‘pre-game Žintrospective. experi-
ence’ weight. If N Ž0. is small the effect of the initial attractions is quickly
displaced by experience. If N Ž0. is large then the effect of the initial attractions
persists.
   Notice that updating the experience-weight by N Ž t . s ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1 implies
a steady-state value of N* s 1rŽ1 y ␳ .. In estimation, we have found it useful to
restrict N Ž0. to be less than N*. This implies N Ž t y 1. F N Ž t .; the experience
weight is Žweakly. rising over time. Since the relative weight on decayed
attractions, compared to recent reinforcement, is always increasing, the relative
weight on observed payoffs is always declining. This implies a ‘law of declining
effect’ that is widely observed in research of learning.
   The flexibility of initial attractions and experience weight allows one to fit a
variety of models. Theories of equilibrium behavior are special cases in which all
‘learning’ occurs before the game starts. For example, a ‘stubborn’ game-theo-
retically-minded player sets A ij Ž0. equal to the equilibrium payoffs of each
strategy and act as if N Ž0. is infinite Žmeaning that no amount of game-playing
experience can outweigh the prior calculation .. An adaptive game theorist
assumes A ij Ž0. are equilibrium payoffs but has a small N Ž0., so she learns from
experience. A player who does not begin with prior beliefs, but updates accord-
842                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


ing to experience as a belief learner does, has ␾ s ␳ and ␦ s 1 with arbitrary
A ij Ž0..



                                    4. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
   In this section we briefly summarize previous research Žsee Camerer Žin
progress. for more details..
   Several papers investigate only belief learning. Cheung and Friedman Ž1997.
ŽCF. estimated a weighted fictitious play model on individual-level data from
four games Žhawkdove, stag hunt, ‘buyer seller’ and battle-of-the-sexes .. They
find substantial heterogeneity across subjects but stability across games in
parameters that are like our ␾ and ␭. A more general belief model, allowing
idiosyncratic shocks in beliefs and time-varying weights, was developed by
Crawford Ž1995. to fit data from coordination games, extended by Broseta Ž1995.
to allow ARCH error terms, and applied by Crawford and Broseta Ž1998. to
coordination with preplay auctions. Brandts and Holt Žin press. and Cooper,
Garvin, and Kagel Žin press. simulate fictitious play in signaling games. Boylan
and El-Gamal Ž1992. compare fictitious play and Cournot learning in coordina-
tion and dominance-solvable games; they find overwhelming relative support for
fictitious play.
   Other studies concentrate only on reinforcement learning. Versions of rein-
forcement in which probabilities were reinforced directly, or cumulative payoffs
normalized, were used by Bush and Mosteller Ž1955., Cross Ž1983., and Arthur
Ž1991.. Harley Ž1981. posited a reinforcement model using cumulative payoffs
and simulated its behavior in several games. The Harley model was later
extended by Roth and Erev Ž1995. to include spillover of reinforcement to
neighboring strategies. Their model fits the time trends in ultimatum, public
good, and responder-competition games but converges much too slowly. McAl-
lister Ž1991. shows that a modified Cross model that uses foregone payoff
information fits weak-link data modestly well. Sarin and Vahid Ž1997. show that
a modified Cross model with distance-weighted spillover of reinforcement to
similar strategies fits data on coordination experiments with low information
fairly well.
   These studies of belief and reinforcement learning find that each approach,
evaluated separately, has some explanatory power. Other studies compared
models.18 Erev and Roth Ž1997. add an adjustable reference point to their
earlier model Žcf. Cross Ž1983... The extended model fits slightly better than
fictitious play, at the individual level, in constant-sum games played for 100 or

  18
     In still another approach, models in which players learn to shift weight across various rules Žor
‘methods’., rather than across strategies, were studied by Tang Ž1996. and by Stahl Ž1996, 1997.. In
Tang’s comparison ‘method-learning’ does slightly worse than reinforcement. Stahl Ž1997. finds that
players seem to weight rules that mimic choices of others or best-respond given diffuse priors.
                             ATTRACTION LEARNING                               843

more periods. Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1994, 1997. ŽMS. compare average-pay-
off reinforcement and fictitious play in constant-sum games; reinforcement does
somewhat better. Ho and Weigelt Ž1996. compare modified versions of fictitious
play and choice reinforcement Žthe MS ‘vindication’ model. in coordination
games with multiple Nash equilibria. Fictitious play fits better. Battalio, Samuel-
son, and Van Huyck Ž1997. compare average-payoff reinforcement and fictitious
play in three variants of stag hunt with the same equilibria but different
disequilibrium incentives to converge. Fictitious play does better but a model
that uses both reinforcements and expected payoffs does better still.
   Many variants of weighted fictitious play and reinforcement Žand other
models. were compared by Tang Ž1996. in games with mixed-strategy equilibria.
Reinforcement does better in most games. Chen and Tang Ž1998. fit models to
data from two public goods games. In one game equilibration is so fast that
Nash equilibrium outpredicts the learning models. In the other game reinforce-
ment does better.
   The overall picture from previous research is somewhat blurry. Comparisons
appear to favor reinforcement in constant-sum games and belief learning in
coordination games. However, specifications of the models and estimation
techniques vary across studies. Our approach allows one to compare models
more systematically by including all features that have been used differently in
different studies. Two general features are especially notable.
   First, most papers assume equal initial attractions or, for belief models,
uniform priors. Some papers estimate initial attractions using data from early
periods Žwhich does not generally optimize overall fit.. Our procedure is more
general because we estimate initial attractions and experience weight as part of
an overall maximization of fit. Estimating initial experience weight N Ž0. allows
belief models to express a prior strength. This is an important feature of belief
learning; omitting it may explain why belief models have sometimes fit relatively
poorly Žin Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1997., Tang Ž1996., Erev and Roth Ž1997.,
Chen and Tang Ž1998...
   Second, some reinforcement models assume averaged payoffs affect choices,
while others assume reinforcements cumulate. This difference can be captured
by allowing ␳ to vary between ␾ Žfor averaging. and 0 Žfor maximum cumula-
tion., as EWA does. In addition, many studies of belief learning did not allow
weighted fictitious play, as EWA does. Including ␾ and ␳ therefore allows us to
determine whether previous mixed results depend on whether reinforcements
are averaged or cumulated, and on whether belief models are weighted.
   Our methodology for model estimation is more general than most earlier
papers in four ways. First, we compare across three classes of games using the
same estimation technique Žonly Cheung and Friedman Ž1997. have done this in
one paper.. Second, our method uses standard statistical tests to judge whether
differences in fit are due to chance, or put differently, to decide whether simple
models are too simple or not. Third, we calibrate models on the first 70% of the
periods in each sample and predict the rest of the sample to validate the
estimates and avoid overfitting Žno previous paper has done this.. Fourth, we
844                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


allow heterogeneity across individuals by comparing a model with a single class
of agents with a two-segment model, which has not been done before.19



               5. PARAMETER ESTIMATION FROM EXPERIMENTAL DATA
                                   5.1. Estimation Strategy
   We estimated the values of model parameters using three samples of experi-
mental data20 and validated the models by predicting behavior out of sample.
The games are: Constant-sum games with unique mixed-strategy equilibria Žand
one weakly dominated strategy.; a ‘median-action’ coordination with multiple
Pareto-ranked equilibria; and a dominance-solvable ‘ p-beauty contest’ game
with a unique equilibrium. We chose these games for several reasons.
   First, the games have a range of different structural features Žas in Cheung
and Friedman Ž1997. and Stahl Ž1997... This avoids the possible mistake of
concluding that a model generally fits well because it happens to fit one class of
games.
   Second, the games have different spansᎏthe constant-sum games last 40
periods and the others last 10 periods. Longer spans provide more data and
more power for estimating individual differences. But a mixture of long and
short spans are valuable too, because some gamesᎏlike the coordination games
ᎏconverge quickly. Learning models should be able to explain why convergence
is quick in those games and slow in others.
   Third, most previous studies have reported results that are favorable to either
reinforcement or belief learning. The games we use each present some new
challenges to these models. The presence of dominated strategies in the con-
stant-sum games is a challenge for belief models, which predict those strategies
will be played relatively rarely. Rapid convergence in the coordination and
dominance-solvable games is a challenge for reinforcement learning Žsee also
Van Huyck, Battalio, and Rankin Ž1996.., which tends to be sluggish.
   Next we describe some general features of the estimation method. For
simplicity we assume that players’ strategies are the stage-game strategies, and
denote player i’s strategy choice in period t by si Ž t .. ŽOf course, in general

  19
      The only paper that estimates individual-level parameters on these kinds of models is Cheung
and Friedman Ž1997.. While the median parameter estimates are reasonable and similar across
games when expected to be, the individual-level estimates are variable Že.g., a third of the ␾
estimates are negative and a sixth are above one.. This reflects some imprecision in individual-level
estimation that suggests that multiple-segment estimation, which lies between single-segment
estimation and individual-level estimation, may be a reasonably parsimonious compromise between
the desires to allow heterogeneity and to estimate reliably.
   20
      Our working paper includes two other samples of data, on weak-link coordination games and
matching pennies ŽMookerjhee and Sopher Ž1994... We dropped these because the weak-link data
did not have a long enough span to permit both calibration and validation; calibration is reported in
Camerer and Ho Ž1999.. The matching pennies data did not distinguish models from each other or
from Nash equilibrium.
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                          845

strategies could be history-dependent or could be decision rules; we say more
about this in the conclusion..
   We use a ‘latent class’ approach in which there are one or two segments of
players, and all players in a segment are assumed to have the same parameter
values. This technique is standard in some fields Že.g., analyses of brand choice
in marketing. and was also suggested by Crawford Ž1995..21 The single-class
estimation provides a representative-agent benchmark. Allowing a second class
gives a clue about how important it is to allow heterogeneity. While allowing
heterogeneity should obviously improve fit in most cases, it does not always. For
example, in constant-sum games, allowing a second class hardly improves the fit
at all.
   The two-class procedure makes sense for these data sets because there are
not enough observations per subject to reliably estimate many more classes. 22
And while including more segments would be desirable, there is no reason to
think that assuming all players have the same parameters favors some models
over others, so this simplification should not alter our conclusions about which
models fit better.
   Estimating initial attractions A j Ž0. Žsuppressing the player subscript., as we
do, has three advantages. First, assuming initial attractions are equal Žor
assuming equal priors in belief models. saves degrees of freedom but fits poorly
in some of these data sets. Second, estimating initial attractions creates raw
material that may be useful for constructing a good theory of first-period play; in
a sense, any such theory is trying to predict the values that we estimate. Third,
forcing a model to maximize fit by estimating learning parameters and initial
attractions at the same time allows the possibility that the model will misspecify
the initial attractions ‘on purpose’. That is, if a model cannot easily explain how
players move away from initial behavior as they learn, it will misestimate the
initial behavior. Therefore, estimating the initial attractions and comparing
them with first-period play serves as an indirect test for gross specification error.
For example, we see below that reinforcement models fail this test for coordina-
tion games.
   Let the stage game be repeated for T rounds. Recall that the indicator
function I Ž sij, si Ž t .. is equal to 1 if sij s si Ž t . and 0 otherwise. Define the vector
                                                            def
of initial attractions for player i to be A i Ž0. s Ž A1i Ž0., A2i Ž0., . . . , Am i Ž ..
                                                                                  i 0 . Since
we study symmetric games and assume all players have the same parameter
values, for this paper there is a common set of initial attractions AŽ0. s A i Ž0.
᭙ i. Define the number of subjects by N. The overall sample size for calibration,

   21
      Note that even though all agents in a class have the same parameter values, after the first
period they will be predicted to behave differently because their actual choices and experiences vary.
   22
      Two segments are also useful because one can then compare a two-segment EWA model with a
two-segment model in which one segment consists of reinforcement learners and the other segment
contains belief learners, to see whether EWA is fitting better than a ‘population mixture’ of belief
and reinforcement learning. We did this in Camerer and Ho Ž1998. for weak-link and median-action
data and found that EWA does fit much better than the mixture model.
846                            COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


.7⭈ T ⭈ N, is denoted by M. Then the log-likelihood function, LLŽ AŽ0., N Ž0.,
␾ , ␳ , ␦ , ␭., is

Ž 5.1.      LL Ž AŽ 0 . , N Ž 0 . , ␾ , ␳ , ␦ , ␭ .


                                      žÝ                                           /
                       0.7⭈T    N         mi
                   s Ý         Ý ln             I Ž sij , si Ž t .. ⭈ Pi j Ž t .
                       ts1 is1            js1




                                      ž                                     e ␭⭈ A i Ž ty1.
                                                                                                /
                                                                                       j
                       0.7⭈T    N         mi
Ž 5.2.             s Ý         Ý ln Ý           I Ž sij , si Ž t .. ⭈           ␭⭈ A i Ž ty1.
                                                                                           k        .
                       ts1 is1            js1                           Ým
                                                                         ks 1 e
                                                                           i




   Keep in mind that in the exponential form, attractions are only identified up
to a constant, so we must fix one of the A j Ž0. to equal a constant. We searched
over parameter values to maximize the LL function using the MAXLIK routine
in GAUSS, which uses a gradient method. To avoid converging to local optima
we tried a variety of starting points. We restricted ␾ , ␭ to be positive, 0 F ␦ , ␳ F 1.
   Generally, violations of these restrictions should be interpreted as either signs
of misspecification, or evidence that the model is trying to reach outside
reasonable parameter values to explain an unusual feature of data. Fortunately,
there are only two cases where the EWA restrictions bindᎏ ␦ˆs 0 in constant-
sum game G1, which we can’t easily explain, and ␳ˆs 0 in coordination games,
which we can explain.23
   In order to make the value of N Ž0. interpretable as a weight on initial
attractions relative to reinforcing payoffs, we restricted the range of A j Ž0. to be
less than or equal to the difference between the minimum and maximum payoffs
in the entire game Žwhile also setting one of the attractions equal to zero for
identifiability..24 Since this restriction is naturally satisfied in belief models, in
order to compare EWA to belief and reinforcement learning we imposed it in
EWA and reinforcement as well.25 We also restricted 0 F N Ž0. F 1rŽ1 y ␳ . to
guarantee that the weights N Ž t . rise over time.

   23
      In the coordination games convergence is very sharp after substantial initial dispersion. To
explain this in the logit model, EWA needs attractions to grow apart as rapidly as possible, so high
attraction strategies are chosen very frequently Žand more frequently than in early periods.. Since
the denominator of the attraction equation is ␳ ⭈ N Ž t y 1. q 1, attractions grow faster if this
denominator shrinks, which means a negative value of ␳ can make growth even faster. Therefore,
the restricted estimate ␳ˆs 0 in the coordination games means the model is trying to make ␳
negative to capture the remarkable pace of equilibration seen in those data.
   24
      If the attractions are not restricted in this way, then the experience weight N Ž0. expresses both
the relative weight on initial attractions and payoffs, and a scaling factor which puts attractions and
payoffs on the same scale. By restricting attractions to have the same range as payoffs, we can then
interpret N Ž0. as a relative weight.
   25
      In our working paper we allowed initial attractions to have arbitrary scale, which made MLE
convergence slower and identification worse. Allowing arbitrary attractions helps reinforcement a bit
in constant-sum games but does not help much in median-action and beauty-contest games.
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                          847

   Standard errors of parameters were estimated using a jackknife procedure. In
each run of the jackknife, one subject was excluded from the analysis and the
model was estimated using all remaining subjects.26 Doing this sequentially
produces N vectors of estimates Žwhere N is the number of subjects.. The
parameter standard errors are then the standard deviations of parameter
estimates across the N runs. ŽCorrelations between parameters can also be
computed this way, and help detect identification problems..
   Since EWA is always more general than the special cases, it will necessarily fit
the data better so there is some danger of overfitting. To guard against this we
use five ways to penalize theories that have more degrees of freedom. We
calibrate the models by deriving MLE estimates using the first 70% of the
observations in each sample, and measure goodness of fit three ways. Then we
validate the models by using the derived estimates to predict the path of play in
the remaining 30% of the sample and measure fit two ways. This procedure uses
enough data to estimate parameters reliably, but also forecasts out-of-sample to
ensure models are not being overfit.
   Obviously, deriving estimates on one part of the sample and predicting the
rest of the sample implicitly assumes stationarity in parameters throughout the
sample. In games that converge within an experiment, it is an open question how
much power out-of-sample forecasting has to distinguish theories when behavior
in the later, holdout-sample periods does not vary much. As is shown below for
coordination games, the power can be substantial. The reason is that some
theories do predict a lot of variation in later periods. If there is little variation
in the holdout sample, the absence of variation counts against a theory that
predicts variation. Also, we use the first 70% of the periods in an experimental
session to calibrate parameter estimates and the final 30% of the periods to
validate Žforecast.. A different approach is to derive estimates for some fraction
of the subjects Žusing their entire samples., and use those estimates to forecast
behavior for a holdout sample of subjects across the entire experimental session.
Future work could use that method and compare the results to ours.
   To evaluate model accuracy in the calibration phase, the three criteria we
report are: Log likelihoods Žthese are used in ␹ 2 tests, which effectively
penalize for EWA., and Akaike and Bayesian information criteria, which
penalize theories according to the number of free parameters in different
ways.27 We also report a pseudo-R 2 , denoted ␳ 2 , based on the Akaike measure,
so one can see how much better the models do than random choice.28 For the
validation sample we report the log likelihood and a mean squared deviation

  26
      For the constant-sum games, with only twenty subjects per game Žten row players and ten
column players., every pair of row and column players were excluded, giving 100 jackknife runs.
   27
      The Akaike criterion ŽAIC. is LL y k and the Bayesian criterion ŽBIC. is LL y Ž kr2. ⭈ log Ž M .
where k is the number of degrees of freedom and M is the size of the calibration sample.
   28
      The measure ␳ 2 is the difference between the Akaike measure and the log likelihood of a
model of random choices, normalized by the random-model log likelihood.
848                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


Ž MSD ., which is defined as
                                                                                2
                          T       N    mi
                                             Pi j Ž t . y I Ž sij , si Ž t ..
Ž 5.3.      MSD s         Ý      Ý Ý               .3⭈ T ⭈ N ⭈ m i
                                                                                    .
                      ts .7⭈Tq1 is1 js1

ŽNote that this MSD does not average observations across individuals.. Model
fits are also compared to a random choice model in which all strategies are
chosen equally often in each period.29
   Since out-of-sample forecasting is a tougher test than in-sample fitting, and
levels the playing field among theories with different numbers of parameters,
why report in-sample fits at all? One reason is that both measures of fit are
needed to judge whether a model does much better in-sample than out-of-sam-
ple, which is the telltale sign of egregious over-fitting. Furthermore, most
previous studies have relied solely on in-sample fits for comparing models.
Reporting them allows readers familiar with such comparisons to weigh the
results against their own standards.
   For each game, we describe the game and basic details of how the experi-
ments were conducted. Then we compare models and discuss parameter esti-
mates.
   Table I previews and summarizes the results. Within each game and measure,
other than LL and ␳ 2 , the best fit statistic is printed in italics and marked with
an asterisk. In both the calibration and validation phases, EWA fits substantially
better in four of six games; in two cases the belief models fit a little better. ŽIf
EWA was overfitting, it would do relatively better in calibration than in
validation, but this isn’t the case.. Belief models do better than reinforcement in
constant-sum games and worse in the median-action game. In the beauty contest
game, the belief model does worse than reinforcement during calibration and
better during validation. The two-segment models generally fit a little better
during both validation and calibration, but the improvement in fit over one-seg-
ment models is small.

                   5.2. Constant-sum Games with Dominated Actions
  We fit data from four constant-sum games: two are 4 = 4 ŽG1 and G3. and the
others are 6 = 6 ŽG2 and G4. from Mookherjee and Sopher Ž1997.. Tables IIa᎐b
show the payoff matrices.30 The 4 = 4 games essentially collapse three of the
undominated actions Žactions 3᎐5. of the 6 = 6 games into a single action
Žaction 3..
  29
      We do not compare results with Nash equilibrium, as many studies do, because it does very
poorly in constant sum games and beauty-contest games Žin which iteratively-dominated strategies
predicted to have zero probability are often played. and does not exclude any choices in the
coordination games.
   30
      The fractional payoffs Že.g., 2r3W ., denote probabilistic chances of winning W. These present a
complication for reinforcement models, including EWAᎏdo you reinforce the actual payoff Žwhich
has a one-third chance of being zero if 2r3W is the payoff. or the expected payoff? We reinforce
according to the expected payoff.
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                             849


                                                TABLE I
           MODEL CALIBRATION AND VALIDATION IN MEDIAN-ACTION, CONSTANT-SUM,
                             AND P-BEAUTY CONTEST GAMES


                                                    Calibration                     Validation
Game                         No. of
Model                      Parameters      LL         AIC            BIC       ␳2     LL          MSD

Constant-sum 1 (M s 560)
1-Segment
  Random                        0       y803.69    y803.69        y803.69 0.0000 y332.71 0.1875
  Choice Reinforcement          5       y681.97    y686.97        y697.96 0.1452 y335.50 0.1888
  Belief-based                  6       y680.23    y686.23        y699.42 0.1461 y285.60* 0.1688*
  EWA                           8       y653.07    y661.07 *      y678.66* 0.1775 y326.38 0.1883
2-Segment
  Random                       0        y803.69    y803.69        y803.69 0.0000 y332.71         0.1875
  Choice Reinforcement        11        y681.69    y692.69        y716.87 0.1381 y328.71         0.1905
  Belief-based                13        y680.12    y693.12        y721.70 0.1376 y285.96         0.1689
  EWA                         17        y652.46    y669.46        y706.83 0.1670 y317.66         0.1865
Constant-sum 2 (M s 560)
1-Segment
  Random                       0        y1003.39 y1003.39         y1003.39 0.0000 y430.02        0.1435
  Choice Reinforcement         7        y853.61 y860.61           y876.00 0.1423 y359.74         0.1222
  Belief-based                 8        y797.72 y805.72           y823.31 0.1970 y350.09         0.1212
  EWA                         10        y790.61 y800.61           y822.59* 0.2021 y341.71        0.1179*
2-Segment
  Random                       0        y1003.39 y1003.39 y1003.39           0.0000 y430.02 0.1435
  Choice Reinforcement        15        y853.50 y868.50   y901.48            0.1344 y363.10 0.1513
  Belief-based                17        y790.10 y807.10   y844.47            0.1956 y347.50 0.1205
  EWA                         21        y776.83 y797.83* y844.00             0.2049 y335.95* 0.1195
Constant-sum 3 (M s 560)
1-Segment
  Random                        0       y803.69    y803.69        y803.69 0.0000 y332.71         0.1875
  Choice Reinforcement          5       y710.14    y715.14        y726.13 0.1102 y308.47         0.1801
  Belief-based                  6       y681.63    y687.63        y700.82* 0.1444 y296.28        0.1728
  EWA                           8       y678.50    y686.50*       y704.09 0.1458 y301.70         0.1767
2-Segment
  Random                       0        y803.69    y803.69        y803.69 0.0000 y332.71 0.1875
  Choice Reinforcement        11        y710.14    y721.14        y745.32 0.1027 y308.30 0.1800
  Belief-based                13        y681.07    y694.07        y722.65 0.1364 y295.85* 0.1722
  EWA                         17        y677.60    y694.60        y731.97 0.1357 y302.88 0.1712*
Constant-sum 4 (M s 560)
1-Segment
  Random                       0        y1003.39 y1003.39 y1003.39 0.0000 y430.02                0.1435
  Choice Reinforcement         7        y901.60 y908.60   y923.99 0.0945 y375.94                 0.1284
  Belief-based                 8        y857.19 y865.19* y882.78* 0.1377 y371.18                 0.1262
  EWA                         10        y855.29 y865.29   y887.27 0.1376 y362.26                 0.1241
2-Segment
  Random                       0        y1003.39 y1003.39         y1003.39   0.0000 y430.02 0.1435
  Choice Reinforcement        15        y901.60 y916.60           y949.58    0.0865 y375.62 0.1283
  Belief-based                17        y856.97 y873.97           y911.34    0.1290 y372.12 0.1265
  EWA                         21        y854.00 y875.00           y921.17    0.1280 y361.15* 0.1239*
850                      COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO

                                                TABLE I
                                                Continued

                                                      Calibration                     Validation
Game                             No. of
Model                          Parameters      LL       AIC            BIC       ␳2      LL         MSD

Median Action (M s 378)
1-Segment
  Random Choice                    0        y677.29   y677.29       y677.29 0.0000 y315.24 0.1217
  Choice Reinforcement             8        y341.70   y349.70       y365.44 0.4837 y80.27 0.0301
  Belief-based                     9        y438.74   y447.74       y465.45 0.3389 y113.90 0.0519
  EWA                             11        y309.30   y320.30       y341.94* 0.5271 y41.05 0.0185
2-Segment
  Random                           0        y677.29   y677.29       y677.29    0.0000 y315.24 0.1217
  Choice Reinforcement            17        y331.25   y348.25       y381.70    0.4858 y66.32 0.0245
  Belief-based                    19        y379.24   y398.24       y435.62    0.4120 y70.31 0.0250
  EWA                             23        y290.25   y313.25*      y358.51    0.5375 y34.79* 0.0139*
p-beauty contests (M s 1372)
1-Segment
  Random                           0        y6318.29 y6318.29       y6318.29   0.0000 y2707.84     0.0099
  Choice Reinforcement            12        y5910.99 y5922.99       y5954.33   0.0626 y2594.37     0.0101
  Belief-based                    13        y6083.04 y6096.04       y6129.99   0.0352 y2554.21     0.0097
  EWA                             15        y5878.20 y5893.20       y5932.38   0.0673 y2381.28     0.0098
2-Segment
  Random                           0        y6318.29 y6318.29 y6318.29 0.0000 y2707.84 0.0099
  Choice Reinforcement            25        y5910.98 y5935.98 y6001.28 0.0605 y2594.17 0.0101
  Belief-based                    27        y6083.02 y6110.02 y6180.54 0.0330 y2554.11 0.0097*
  EWA                             31        y5771.46 y5802.46* y5883.43* 0.0816 y2355.00* 0.0098



   Note that these games each have a weakly dominated action Žaction 4 in G1
and G3 and 6 in G2 and G4.. Dominated actions are useful for model
discrimination because belief-based models always predict these actions will be
chosen Žweakly. less frequently than dominant actions, whereas the arbitrary
initial attractions allowed by EWA and choice reinforcement can allow frequent
choices of dominated strategies.
   All these games have a unique mixed strategy equilibrium that is symmetric
Ževen though the games are not symmetric.. In games G1 and G3, in equilibrium
actions 1᎐4 are played with probabilities 3r8, 2r8, 3r8, 0 respectively. In games
G2 and G4, equilibrium proportions are 3r8, 2r8, 1r8, 1r8, 1r8, 0 for actions
1᎐6.
   Each game was played by 10 different pairs of subjects playing with the same
partner 40 times. At the end of each period players were told their partner’s
choice and their own payoff. In games G1 and G2 a win paid 5 rupees; in games
G3 and G4 the payoffs were doubled to 10 rupees. ŽA typical student’s monthly
room and board cost 600 rupees..
   We derived MLE parameter estimates using the first 28 periods, and validated
by predicting the last 12 periods. Because the payoff matrix is not symmetric
Ževen though the equilibrium mixed-strategy proportions are., we estimate
separate initial attractions A ij Ž0. and separate initial experience-weights Ni j Ž0.
                                       ATTRACTION LEARNING                                    851

                                               TABLE IIa
                         4 = 4 CONSTANT SUM GAMES, G1 ŽWs 5 RUPEES.;
                                    AND G3 Ž Ws 10 RUPEES.


                                                          Column
                                  S1           S2             S3                S4

                    S1        W, L         L, W             L, W               W, L
                    S2        L, W         L, W             W, L               W, L
         Row
                    S3        L, W         W, L       1r3W, 2r3W         1r3W, 2r3W
                    S4        L, W         L, W       2r3W, 1r3W               W, L


                                               TABLE IIb
             6 = 6 CONSTANT-SUM GAMES, G2 ŽWs 5 RUPEES. AND G4 ŽWs 10 RUPEES.

                                                          Column
                             S1           S2         S3            S4    S5           S6

                  S1        W,L          L,W        L,W            L,W   L,W          W,L
                  S2        L,W          L,W        W,L            W,L   W,L          W,L
                  S3        L,W          W,L        L,W            L,W   W,L          L,W
       Row
                  S4        L,W          W,L        W,L            L,W   L,W          L,W
                  S5        L,W          W,L        L,W            W,L   L,W          W,L
                  S6        L,W          L,W        W,L            L,W   W,L          W,L


for row and column players Žthough we restrict the total experience weight N Ž0.
to be the same for both types of players.. Tables IIIa᎐b show the MLE
parameter estimates of the models, and ␹ 2 tests of the belief and reinforcement
restrictions Žalong with p-values and degrees of freedom.. We report only the
one-segment results because the two-segment results do not improve much and
offer no special insights.
   Tables IIIa᎐b shows that for one-segment models, belief-based models and
choice reinforcement restrictions are weakly and strongly rejected by ␹ 2 tests,
respectively, in the calibration phase. In the validation phase, the reinforcement
model is worst. The belief model is better than EWA in the four-strategy games
G1 and G3, and worse in the six-strategy games G2 and G4. These differences
are not large, however, and seem to be due to an idiosyncracy in game G1.31
   Tables IIIa᎐b report parameter estimates and jackknifed standard errors. The
initial conditions Aˆj Ž0. are encouragingly similar in pairs of low- and high-stakes
games ŽG1᎐G3 and G2᎐G4., and put low initial attraction on the dominated
  31
     In game G1, EWA overfits the first 28 periods because it detects some upward trend in
strategies S1 and S3, and downward trend in S2. These trends are reversed in the last 12 periods so
EWA predicts poorly there. The belief model estimates differences in initial expected payoffs but
has a huge value of NˆŽ0. s 300, so it doesn’t predict much movement at all.
852                             COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO

                                               TABLE IIIa
                          4 = 4 CONSTANT-SUM GAMES ŽG1 AND G3. Ž Ms 560.

                                                   Choice
                             EWA                Reinforcement                Belief-Based Models
Parameters              G1          G3         G1          G3             G1                       G3

Initial Values
ROW
  A1 Ž0. w N 1 Ž0.x    1.320       5.237      0.000     10.000       1.780 w107.370x      3.914 w22.703x
                      Ž0.059.     Ž0.222.    Ž0.012.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.029. w1.758x      Ž0.073. w0.423x
  A2 Ž0. w N 2 Ž0.x    1.145       1.172      0.000      0.000       1.422 w107.290x      1.739 w25.214x
                      Ž0.092.     Ž0.265.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.070. w4.687x      Ž0.290. w1.403x
  A3 Ž0. w N 3 Ž0.x    1.913       7.187      5.000     10.000       2.262 w85.335x       4.927 w10.084x
                      Ž0.066.     Ž0.300.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.057. w4.187x      Ž0.149. w1.682x
  A4 Ž0. w N 4 Ž0.x    0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       0.948 w0.000x        1.159 w0.000x
                      Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.047. w0.000x      Ž0.193. w0.000x
COLUMN
 A1 Ž0. w N 1 Ž0.x     2.681       6.790      5.000     10.000       3.385 w96.887x       6.674 w19.294x
                      Ž0.091.     Ž0.640.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.049. w2.923x      Ž0.092. w0.536x
  A2 Ž0. w N 2 Ž0.x    2.583       6.859      5.000     10.000       3.079 w87.932x       6.423 w17.962x
                      Ž0.102.     Ž0.580.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.043. w2.582x      Ž0.089. w0.935x
  A3 Ž0. w N 3 Ž0.x    2.345       5.359      5.000      8.408       2.896 w115.280x      5.711 w20.744x
                      Ž0.092.     Ž0.735.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.040. w2.563x      Ž0.136. w0.514x
  A4 Ž0. w N 4 Ž0.x    0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       1.281 w0.001x        2.384 w0.000x
                      Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.029. w0.000x      Ž0.059. w0.000x
      N Ž0.           19.630      18.391      1.000      1.000          300.000              58.000
                      Ž0.065.     Ž0.713.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.          w0.000x             w0.001x
Decay Parameters
   ␾                   1.040       1.005      1.012       0.978          1.000                1.000
                      Ž0.010.     Ž0.009.    Ž0.006.     Ž0.008.        Ž0.001.              Ž0.005.
      ␳                0.961       0.946      0.000       0.000          1.000                1.000
                      Ž0.014.     Ž0.011.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.        Ž0.001.              Ž0.005.
Imagination factor
     ␦               0.000         0.730      0.000       0.000          1.000                1.000
                    Ž0.035.       Ž0.103.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.        Ž0.000.              Ž0.000.
Payoff sensitivity
     ␭               0.508         0.182      0.053       0.033          1.168                0.459
                    Ž0.048.       Ž0.015.    Ž0.004.     Ž0.002.        Ž0.067.              Ž0.063.
Log-likelihood
    yLL            653.072       678.496    681.968    710.136          680.232             y681.632
     ␹2               ᎏ             ᎏ        57.792     63.280           54.320               5.328
Ž p-value, dof.                             Ž0.000, 3. Ž0.000, 3.      Ž0.000, 2.           Ž0.067, 2.



strategies. The initial experience weight NˆŽ0. varies between about 10᎐20 and is
close to its steady-state value of 1rŽ1 y ␳ .. This means that initial attractions
are weighted quite heavily, which is reasonable given the slow convergence in
these 40-period games. The decay parameters ␾ˆ and ␳ˆ are close to one, with
␾ˆ) ␳ˆ. These numbers imply that attractions grow only slightly on average. By
forcing ␳ s 0, in contrast, the reinforcement model forces attractions to grow
and ‘locks in’ initial behavior too quickly. Finally, ␦ˆ is between .4 and .7 and
                                         ATTRACTION LEARNING                                           853



                                               TABLE IIIb
                          6 = 6 CONSTANT-SUM GAMES ŽG2 AND G4. Ž Ms 560.

                                                   Choice
                              EWA               Reinforcement                Belief-Based Models
Parameters               G2         G4          G2          G4             G2                  G4

Initial Values
ROW
  A1 Ž0. w N 1 Ž0.x     2.996      9.491      5.000       10.000      2.309 w41.566x      5.335 w16.005x
                       Ž0.068.    Ž0.145.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.045. w0.810x     Ž0.053. w0.283x
  A2 Ž0. w N 2 Ž0.x     2.434      7.964      5.000       10.000      2.077 w11.048x      4.665 w0.001x
                       Ž0.043.    Ž0.090.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.036. w0.886x     Ž0.053. w0.000x
  A3 Ž0. w N 3 Ž0.x     0.000      0.027      0.000        0.000      1.122 w10.227x      0.734 w1.090x
                       Ž0.015.    Ž0.081.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.086. w1.111x     Ž0.050. w0.083x
  A4 Ž0. w N 4 Ž0.x     0.000      0.004      0.000        0.000      1.182 w18.018x      0.364 w10.704x
                       Ž0.036.    Ž0.001.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.080. w0.850x     Ž0.026. w0.298x
  A5 Ž0. w N 5 Ž0.x     1.338      6.105      0.229        8.501      1.615 w9.141x       3.568 w2.200x
                       Ž0.034.    Ž0.060.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.030. w0.993x     Ž0.071. w0.115x
  A6 Ž0. w N 6 Ž0.x     0.000      0.000      0.000        0.000      1.076 w0.000x       0.097 w0.000x
                       Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.038. w0.000x     Ž0.040. w0.000x
COLUMN
 A1 Ž0. w N 1 Ž0.x      4.998      8.733      5.000       10.000      3.595 w25.296x      7.769 w6.692x
                       Ž0.020.    Ž0.198.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.044. w0.797x     Ž0.072. w0.253x
  A2 Ž0. w N 2 Ž0.x     4.047      6.306      4.852        9.996      3.218 w32.627x      6.383 w10.301x
                       Ž0.046.    Ž0.080.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.034. w1.151x     Ž0.131. w0.496x
  A3 Ž0. w N 3 Ž0.x     2.201      1.572      0.001        0.001      2.444 w16.539x      3.954 w5.141x
                       Ž0.050.    Ž0.049.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.068. w0.922x     Ž0.102. w0.352x
  A4 Ž0. w N 4 Ž0.x     3.852      6.565      4.973        9.832      3.068 w13.391x      6.557 w5.684x
                       Ž0.043.    Ž0.070.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.053. w0.914x     Ž0.150. w0.462x
  A5 Ž0. w N 5 Ž0.x     1.737      1.851      0.000        0.001      2.269 w2.147x       4.135 w0.028x
                       Ž0.047.    Ž0.267.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.085. w0.389x     Ž0.213. w0.000x
  A6 Ž0. w N 6 Ž0.x     0.000      0.000      0.000        0.000      1.663 w0.000x       3.608 w2.155x
                       Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.    Ž0.034. w0.000x     Ž0.131. w0.373x
  N Ž0.                15.276      9.937      1.000        1.000         90.000              30.000
                       Ž0.009.    Ž0.017.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.        Ž0.012.             Ž0.448.
Decay Parameters
   ␾                    0.986      0.991      0.960        0.962          0.989               1.000
                       Ž0.005.    Ž0.011.    Ž0.005.      Ž0.005.        Ž0.004.             Ž0.002.
     ␳                  0.935      0.926      0.000        0.000          0.989               1.000
                       Ž0.006.    Ž0.024.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.        Ž0.004.             Ž0.002.
Imagination factor
   ␦                    0.413      0.547      0.000        0.000          1.000               1.000
                       Ž0.082.    Ž0.054.    Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.        Ž0.000.             Ž0.000.
Payoff sensitivity
    ␭                   0.646      0.218       0.098       0.046         1.812               1.501
                       Ž0.030.    Ž0.019.     Ž0.005.     Ž0.002.       Ž0.123.             Ž0.019.
     yLL              790.608    855.288    853.608      901.600       797.720             842.968
     ␹2                  ᎏ          ᎏ       126.000       92.264        14.224              21.280
Ž p-value, dof.                              Ž0.000,3.   Ž0.000,3.     Ž0.001,2.           Ž0.000,2.
854                      COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


significantly different from both zero and one, except in game G1 where it is
estimated to be zero.
    Notice how the EWA estimates reflect a hybridization of elements of rein-
forcement and belief learning. First, the initial EWA attractions place much less
relative weight on the dominated strategies Žthe highest-numbered strategies 4
or 6. than the corresponding expected payoffs in belief models. In the belief
model the gap between the initial expected payoffs of strategy 2 Žthe dominant
strategies . and the dominated strategies cannot be too large because the
strategies are only weakly dominated. For example, in game G1 the estimated
EWA attractions on row strategies 2 and 4 are 1.14 and .00, while the corre-
sponding estimated expected payoffs are 1.42 and .95, a gap less than half as
large. Thus, EWA exploits the flexibility of initial attractions from reinforcement
models to squash the likelihood of playing weakly dominated strategies further
down than belief models can. Second, EWA borrows the belief-model property
that attractions do not grow much, since ␾ˆ and ␳ˆ are very close. Third, the
estimates of ␦ around .5 Žexcept G1. reflect both the law of simulated effect
Ž ␦ ) 0. and stronger effects of actual payoffs than foregone payoffs Ž ␦ - 1..
    Our conclusions about the relative performance of reinforcement and belief
models are different from the findings of Mookerjhee and Sopher Ž1997.. Their
analysis differed in a couple of important ways.32 They allowed cross-effects so
that the attraction A ij Ž t . can affect the probability of playing other strategies
differentially, which is more general than our approach and seems to favor
reinforcement in their estimation. Their version of reinforcement also used
‘a¨ erage achieved earnings’ rather than Žweighted. cumulative earnings. The fact
that ␾ˆ was very close to ␳ˆ in the EWA estimates indicates that MS took the
right tack by using average earnings rather than cumulative earnings, because
the cumulative-earnings assumption predicts a sharpness of convergence that is
not evident in the data. In addition, their version of the belief model Žwhich uses
time-averaged expected payoffs. does not begin with an initial pre-game experi-
ence count expressing prior beliefs. Our estimates of N Ž0. range from 30 to 300,
which means that the belief model does best when it starts with a strong prior
and updates very little. Thus, the difference between our results and theirs is
either due to their use of cross-effects of attractions on other-strategy probabili-
ties, to the fact that they use averaged reinforcements rather than cumulative
ones Žwhich improves reinforcement relative to our method., or to the fact that
they did not allow strong prior beliefs Žwhich handicaps the belief model relative
to our method..
    Finally, notice that these constant-sum games simply do not distinguish
models empirically very well Žas shown also by Erev and Roth Ž1997.., and the

   32
      Their analysis used logit estimation of strategy choices to judge whether choices depended
more strongly on a player’s own average past earnings Ža kind of choice reinforcement. or on
expected earnings based on opponent’s past history Žfictitious play.. They also compared models
based on the entire previous history, weighting all observations equally, with models based on a
five-period moving average. ŽThe entire-history models fit better..
                                  ATTRACTION LEARNING                                        855

                                           TABLE IV
                                   THE MEDIAN EFFORT GAME

                                                   Median  Xi 4
                          7         6         5        4            3       2       1

                 7      1.30       1.15     0.90      0.55         0.10   y0.45   y1.10
                 6      1.25       1.20     1.05      0.80         0.45    0.00   y0.55
                 5      1.10       1.15     1.10      0.95         0.70    0.35   y0.10
           Xi    4      0.85       1.00     1.05      1.00         0.85    0.60    0.25
                 3      0.50       0.75     0.90      0.95         0.90    0.75    0.50
                 2      0.05       0.40     0.65      0.80         0.85    0.80    0.65
                 1     y0.50      y0.05     0.30      0.55         0.70    0.75    0.70



pseudo-R 2 ’s are low. Coordination games, in which players converge quickly,
may prove to be a better domain in which to distinguish theories.

                                 5.3. Median-action Games
   In median-action order-statistic coordination games, the group payoff de-
pends on the median of all players’ actions.33 Table IV shows the payoff matrix
used by Van Huyck, Battalio, and Beil ŽVHBB Ž1990.., whose data we use.
   Players earn a payoff that increases in the median, and decreases in the
Žsquared. deviation from the median. The median-action games capture social
situations in which conformity pressures induce people to behave like others do,
but everyone prefers the group to choose a high median.
   We estimate EWA, choice reinforcement, and belief models using sessions
1᎐6 from VHBB Žgame ⌫ .. In their experiments groups of nine subjects each
play ten periods together, so the sample has 54 subjects.34 In each round players
choose an integer from 1 to 7, inclusive. At the end of each round the median is
announced Žbut not the full distribution of choices. and players compute their
payoffs. Since the groups are large Žand players do not know what the median
would be if their own choice was different., we assume that players form beliefs
over the median of all players, ignoring their own influence on the median and
treating the group as a composite single player.
   Figure 1a shows the actual frequencies across the six sessions, pooled to-
gether. Initial choices are concentrated around 4᎐5, with a dip at 6 and small
spikes at 3 and 7. Later choices move sharply toward the initial medians, which
were always 4 or 5. A striking feature, which is masked by pooling sessions, is
that the 10th-round median in e¨ ery session was equal to the first-round median.
   33
      Camerer and Ho Ž1999. also report estimates from ’weak-link’ coordination games in which the
group payoff depends on the minimum. The parameter estimates are similar to those reported here
ᎏfor example ␳ˆ is .65 and N Ž0. is around two.
   34
      They compared two treatments using nine-person groups and ‘dual market’ Ždm. treatments in
which players play with a nine-person group and a twenty-seven person group simultaneously. There
is no apparent or statistically-significant difference between these treatments so we pool them
together.
856                   COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO




                   FIGURE 1A.ᎏActual frequencies, median-effort games.



In three sessions the median began at 4 and stayed there; in the other three
sessions the median began at 5 and stayed there. Figure 1a shows three key
features of the data that any learning model should account for: The initial
spikes at 4᎐5 roughly double in size Žas players converge fully toward them.;
disequilibrium choices of 3 and 7 are quickly extinguished after the first period;
and there is a ‘‘dip’’ in initial choices at 6 Žfewer players choose 6 than choose
neighboring strategies 5 or 7..
   From a learning point of view, median-action games are interesting because
the penalty for deviating is fairly small if the players are close to equilibrium.
Yet sharp convergence occurs within a couple of periods. Learning models that
assume choices are reinforced must explain why players move quickly to equilib-
rium despite the large reinforcement if they are close to equilibrium and the
small extra gain from moving precisely to equilibrium. The EWA model can
account for this swift convergence if ␦ is close to one, incorporating the
best-responsiveness inherent in belief learning.
                            ATTRACTION LEARNING                              857




                      FIGURE 1B.ᎏPredictive errors of EWA model.



   Table V shows estimation results for the median-action games. First we focus
on one-segment results. EWA fits better than the reinforcement model Ž ␹ 2 s
64.8. and much better than the belief model Ž ␹ 2 s 258.9.. The sources of
EWA’s improved fit are evident from looking at the data and plots of prediction
errors.
   Figure 1a shows that in the actual data, there are two large spikes in initial
choices at 4᎐5, smaller spikes Žabout 15% of the observations. at 3 and 7, and
few observations at 6. The estimated EWA initial attractions basically reflect
this pattern in the data. The accuracy of the reflection can be judged from
Figure 1b, an EWA error plot. This figure shows the difference between ŽMLE.
predicted frequencies of the EWA model and the actual frequencies. The
largest error is that EWA underpredicts the frequency of choices of 3 by about
.06; predictions of 6 and 7 are too high by .03 and .01.
   Reinforcement and belief learning cannot fit the initial conditions as well as
EWA, but for different reasons. Reinforcement learning underpredicts the
858                    COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO




                 FIGURE 1C.ᎏPredictive errors of choice reinforcement model.



actual initial frequencies of 3 and 7 by about .08. Players who chose strategy 7 in
the first period quickly switch to lower numbers in period 2, as Figure 1a shows.
ŽThe same is true for players who chose strategy 3, but this cannot be seen in
Figure 1a.. Reinforcement learning cannot predict how quickly this convergence
occurs. Since the initial medians are 4᎐5, choices of 3 or 7 earn between $.55
and $.95, while ex-post best responses earn $1.00 to $1.10. Since the initial
choices are positively reinforced, reinforcement learning cannot explain why
subjects will abandon these strategies so quickly and switch in the direction of
the observed median. ŽEWA explains convergence with a high estimate of
␦ˆs .85.. Since choice reinforcement does not adjust chosen strategies quickly
enough, to maximize overall fit it deliberately misestimates the first-period
choices by assuming the initial frequencies are close to frequencies in later
periods, thereby underpredicting choices of 3 and 7 Žand overpredicting 4᎐5..
   Figure 1c shows that the belief model underpredicts 3 and 7 also, but for a
different reason. In the belief-based framework it is hard to explain why players
                              ATTRACTION LEARNING                               859




                    FIGURE 1D.ᎏPredictive errors of belief-based model.



would play 6 less than they play 5 or 7. The problem is that initial beliefs that
give a high expected payoff to 4᎐5 Žexpecting a median of 4᎐5. also give an
expected payoff to 6 that is nearly as large, and larger than the expected payoff
to 7. Beliefs that give a large expected payoff to 7, because there is a high
probability that the median will be 7, will also give a high expected payoff to 6.
Thus, it is difficult to find a single set of beliefs that can explain the spikes at
4᎐5 and 7, without also predicting a spike at 6. As a result, Table V shows that
the one-segment model generates initial expected payoffs that are higher for 6
Ž$.78. than for 3 or 7 Ž$.71 and $.60., so it overpredicts 6 and underpredicts 3
and 7 Žand also overpredicts 5..
   Adding a second segment of players improves the belief-model fit dramati-
cally. As Table V shows, the log likelihood improves a lot Žthe ␹ 2 statistics for
the two-segment results compare one- and two-segment fits within each model..
The two belief-model segments correspond naturally to a large Ž78%. segment
with high expected payoffs for 4᎐5 generated by high initial beliefs in 4᎐5, and a
                                                                      TABLE V




                                                                                                                                                                     860
                                                           MEDIAN EFFORT GAMES, Ž Ms 378.

                                          EWA                         Choice Reinforcement                               Belief-Based Models
Parameters                    1-Segment        2-Segment        1-Segment         2-Segment             1-Segment                       2-Segment

Initial valuesrSegment Size                0.659      0.341                    0.799        0.201                               0.785                 0.215
                                          Ž0.012 .   Ž0.012 .                Ž0.008 .     Ž0.008 .                            Ž0.007 .              Ž0.007 .
    1Ž
  A 0.       w N 1Ž0 .x        0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000        0.000        0.000     0.168 w0.075 x      0.457 w0.096 x       y0.500 w0.000 x
                              Ž0.000 .    Ž0.000.    Ž0.000 .    Ž0.000.     Ž 0.000.     Ž 0.000.   Ž 0.007 w 0.018x.   Ž 0.007 w 0.010x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.000x.
  A 0.
    2Ž       wN   2Ž
                       0 .x    0.000       0.095      0.034       0.000        0.000        0.002      0.491 w0.049x      0.725 w0.037 x        0.050 w0.000 x
                              Ž0.145 .    Ž0.028.    Ž0.175.     Ž0.028.     Ž 0.028.     Ž 0.113.   Ž 0.005 w0.012x.    Ž 0.005 w 0.005x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.000x.
  A 3Ž0 .    w N 3Ž0 .x        0.337       0.000      2.400       0.877        0.000        2.400      0.713 w0.059 x     0.893 w0.083x         0.500 w0.000 x
                              Ž0.144 .    Ž0.000.    Ž0.010 .    Ž0.033.     Ž 0.020.     Ž 0.073.   Ž 0.002 w 0.014x.   Ž 0.002 w 0.012x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.000x.
  A 4 Ž0 .    w N 4 Ž0 .x      0.561       2.387      2.400       2.400        2.400        0.007     0.836 w0.073 x      0.961 w1.124 x        0.850 w0.000x
                              Ž0.143.     Ž0.005.    Ž0.328.     Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.      Ž0.379.    Ž0.003 w0.019x.     Ž 0.003 w 0.063x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.000x.
  A 5Ž 0 .   w N 5Ž0 .x        0.505       2.400      0.000       2.261        2.400        0.006     0.859 w0.093 x      0.928 w0.490 x        1.100 w0.000 x
                              Ž0.143 .    Ž0.008.    Ž0.327 .    Ž0.021.     Ž 0.050.     Ž 0.135.   Ž 0.003 w 0.022x.   Ž 0.003 w 0.069x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.000x.
  A 6 Ž0 .   w N 6 Ž0 .x       0.364       2.313      1.797       1.329        1.293        0.013      0.781 w0.123 x     0.796 w0.126 x         1.250 w0.00 x
                              Ž0.148.     Ž0.007.    Ž0.255.     Ž0.033.     Ž0.049.      Ž 0.135.   Ž 0.006 w 0.028x.   Ž 0.006 w 0.017x.     Ž 0.006 w 0.000x.
  A7Ž0 .     w N 7Ž0 .x        0.431       2.348      2.000       0.986        0.000        2.400     0.604 w0.170x       0.564 w0.019x         1.300 w0.358x
                              Ž0.146 .    Ž0.008.    Ž0.111 .    Ž0.041.     Ž 0.072.     Ž 0.072.   Ž 0.008 w 0.038x.   Ž 0.008 w 0.002x.     Ž 0.000 w 0.051x.
  N Ž0 .                       0.647       0.205      0.149       1.000        1.000        1.000           0.642               1.976                0.358
                              Ž0.059 .    Ž0.027 .   Ž0.034 .    Ž0.000.     Ž 0.000.     Ž 0.000.        Ž 0.150 .           Ž 0.115 .             Ž 0.051.
Decay Parameters
   ␾                           0.800       0.746      0.800       0.930        0.979        0.000          0.738               0.494                   0.999
                              Ž0.018.     Ž0.030.    Ž0.020.     Ž0.009.     Ž 0.011.     Ž 0.235.       Ž 0.054.            Ž 0.030.                 Ž 0.00.
    ␳                          0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000        0.000        0.000         0.738               0.494                   0.999
                                                                                                                                                                   COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO




                              Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.    Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.     Ž 0.000.     Ž 0.000.       Ž 0.054.            Ž 0.030.                Ž 0.000.
Imagination factor
   ␦                           0.853       0.947      0.497       0.000       0.000        0.000          1.000               1.000                    1.000
                              Ž0.005 .    Ž0.002 .   Ž0.014 .    Ž0.000.     Ž0.000.      Ž0.000.        Ž0.000.             Ž0.000.                 Ž 0.000.
Payoff sensitivity
   ␭                           6.827      17.987      2.969       1.190        1.002        0.365         16.726             43.600                    5.868
                              Ž0.251.     Ž0.869.    Ž0.127.     Ž0.015.     Ž 0.032.     Ž 0.777.       Ž 0.366.            Ž 0.837.                Ž 0.448.
    yLL                       309.304          290.255           341.697           331.348               438.748                         379.236
     ␹2                         ᎏ               38.098           64.785              20.698              258.888                         119.024
  Ž p-value, dof.                             Ž0.000,12.        Ž0.000,3.          Ž0.014,9.            Ž0.000,2.                       Ž0.000,10.
                                  ATTRACTION LEARNING                                        861

smaller Ž22%. segment with belief only in 7, which generates the highest
expected payoff for 7. While testing the restriction that the second segment does
not improve fit rejects strongly Ž ␹ 2 s 119.0., the two-segment belief model still
does not fit as well as the one- or two-segment EWA model.
   Finally, Table I shows that EWA performs much better than the other models
in out-of-sample validation, using either the LL or MSD measure. The error
plots show that reinforcement overpredicts the number of people choosing 6 in
periods eight and ten, because these choices are positively reinforced and should
persist; EWA does a little better by predicting that these late-period choices
move toward 4᎐5. The belief model predicts a growth in strategies 3 and 6 over
time, because the expected payoffs of those strategies will be almost as high as
the expected payoffs from strategies 4᎐5 as equilibration occurs. Since those
strategies are rarely used in later periods, the belief model badly overpredicts
them in those periods.
   Besides fitting initial conditions, a good learning model must explain why
convergence in the first couple of periods is fast and sharp. EWA does this by
estimating a large value of ␦ Ž.85. and ␾ˆ much larger than ␳ˆ, which allows
attractions to grow rapidly so that choice probabilities move toward zero and
one swiftly. The low value of N Ž0., .65, also allows players to learn quickly from
payoff reinforcement relative to initial attractions.
   The estimates show how EWA mixes and matches the best features of belief
and reinforcement learning: It allows near-best response Ž ␦ close to one. as in
belief models, which explains why players choosing near-equilibrium strategies
move quickly toward equilibrium. But as in reinforcement, it can allow arbitrary
initial attractions, which explains the relative paucity of choices of 6 in the first
period, and allows attractions to grow Žbecause ␳ s 0. to explain the sharpness
of convergence. As a result, the EWA errors ŽFigure 1b. are generally much
smaller than those in reinforcement ŽFigure 1c. and belief learning ŽFigure 1d..
   The results shown in the error plots are for one-segment models. Adding a
second segment improves fits significantly for all three models. In EWA, the
larger segment Žwith proportion 66%. has an estimate ␦ˆs .95, very close to the
belief restriction of one, while the smaller second segment has ␦ˆs .50. This
corresponds to a segment of people with belief-type equal weighting of actual
and foregone payoffs, and another segment who weight actual payoffs twice as
heavily. Notice that these two segments do not particularly correspond to one
segment of reinforcement learners and another segment of belief learners, so
EWA is not simply capturing a mixture of these two special cases.
   In reinforcement, the larger segment Ž80%. has parameter values which are
similar to those in the single segment, except the estimates of initial attractions
for 3 and 7 are zero. The smaller second segment Ž20%. is the oppositeᎏ
strategies 3 and 7 have the largest possible initial attractions and all the others
are close to zeroᎏexcept that ␾ˆs 0.35 This means the two-segment structure is
   35
      The estimate of zero for ␾ is the full-sample MLE estimate. The jackknifed standard error of
.235 means that in many jackknife samples ␾ is estimated to be positive. Indeed, the mean of the
jackknife estimates is .18, but this does not substantially affect the point we make in the text.
862                                COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


trying to solve the problem of explaining first-period choices of 3 and 7 that are
quickly extinguished by creating a second segment of players who choose only 3
or 7 initially, then immediately decay their initial attraction. But adding this
segment does not improve log likelihood much and the two-segment reinforce-
ment model still fits worse than the one-segment EWA model.
   The two-segment belief model improves fit substantially but still does not
capture initial attractions flexibly enough Žcompared to EWA.. We think the
problem is that the belief model requires initial behavior to be consistent with
prior beliefs and requires beliefs to be updated using weighted fictitious play.
The latter assumption requires ␦ s 1 and ␾ s ␳ . In games like the median-ac-
tion game, the ␦ s 1 assumption is a reasonable approximation but ␾ s ␳ does
not allow sharp enough convergence.36 More importantly, forcing initial attrac-
tions to spring from expected payoffs does not explain behavior of players who
use certain decision rules. For example, a player who randomizes among
different selection principles will not necessarily choose according to expected
payoffs given prior.


                          5.4. Dominance-sol¨ able p-Beauty Contest Games
   In a p-beauty contest game, n players simultaneously choose numbers x i in
some interval, say w0,100x. The average of their numbers x s Ý ni x irn is com-
puted, which establishes a target number, ␶ , equal to p⭈ x. The player whose
number is closest to the target wins a fixed prize n ⭈ ␲ Žand ties are broken
randomly 37 ..
   P-beauty contest games were first studied experimentally by Nagel Ž1995. and
extended by Ho, Camerer, and Weigelt Ž1998. and Duffy and Nagel Žin press..
These games are useful for estimating the number of steps of iterated domi-
nance players use in reasoning through games. To illustrate, suppose p s .7.
Since the target can never be above 70, any number choice above 70 is
stochastically dominated by simply picking 70. Similarly, players who obey
dominance, and believe others do too, will pick numbers below 49 so choices in
the interval Ž49,100x violate the conjunction of dominance and one step of
iterated dominance. The unique Nash equilibrium is 0.
   There are two behavioral regularities in beauty contest games Žsee Nagel
Ž1999. for a review.. First, initial choices are widely dispersed and centered
somewhere between the interval midpoint and the equilibrium. This basic result
has been replicated with students on three continents and with several samples
of sophisticated adults, including economics Ph.D.’s and a sample of CEOs and

   36
      The fact that ␳ˆs 0 in EWA Žand never varies across the jackknife runs. also suggests that
adding more segments to the belief model will not improve fit substantially compared to EWA
models with the same number of segments, because the belief models are always constrained to have
␳ s ␾.
   37
      Formally, ␲ Ž x i , xyi . s n ⭈ ␲ ⭈ I Ž x i , argmin x j < x j y ␶ <.rÝ i I Ž x i , argmin x j < x j y ␶ <. where I Ž x, y . is
the indicator function that equals one if xs y and 0 otherwise.
                                     ATTRACTION LEARNING                                           863

corporate presidents Žsee Camerer Ž1997... Second, when the game is repeated,
numbers gradually converge toward the equilibrium.
   Explaining beauty contest convergence is a challenge for adaptive learning
models. Standard choice reinforcement is likely to converge far too slowly,
because only one player wins each period and the losers get no reinforcement.
Belief models with low values of ␾ , which update beliefs very quickly, may track
the learning process reasonably well, but earlier work suggests Cournot dynam-
ics do not converge fast enough either ŽHo, Camerer, and Weigelt Ž1998...
   The three models were estimated on a subsample of data collected by Ho,
Camerer, and Weigelt Ž1998.. Subjects were 196 undergraduate students in
computer science and engineering in Singapore. Each seven-person group of
players played 10 times together twice, with different values of p in the two
10-period sequences. ŽOne sequence used p ) 1 and is not included below.. The
prize was .5 Singapore dollars per player each time, about $2.33 per group for
seven-person groups. They were publicly told the target number ␶ and privately
told their own payoff Ži.e., whether they were closest or not..
   We analyze a subsample of their data with ps .7 and .9, from groups of size
7. This subsample combines groups in a ‘high experience’ condition Žthe game is
the second one subjects play, following a game with a value of p ) 1. and the
‘low experience’ condition Žthe game is the first they play.. The experience
conditions were pooled to create enough data to get reliable estimates.
   Several design choices were necessary to implement the model. The subjects
chose integers in the interval w0, 100x, a total of 101 strategies. If we allow 101
possible values of A j Ž0. we quickly use too many degrees of freedom estimating
the initial attractions. Rather than imposing too many structural requirements
on the distribution of A j Ž0., we assumed initial attractions were equal in
ten-number intervals w0, 9x, w10, 19x, etc.38
   To implement EWA we assumed subjects knew the winning number, w s
argmin x j w < x j y ␶ <x, and neglected the effect of their own choice on the target
number.39 Define the distance between the winning number and the target
number as ds <␶ y w <. All subjects reinforced numbers in the intervals Ž␶ y d, ␶
q d . by ␦ times the prize, and numbers in the intervals w0, ␶ y d . and Ž␶ q d, 100x
received no reinforcement. Winners reinforced the boundary number they
chose, either ␶ y d or ␶ q d, by the prize divided by the number of winners, and
reinforced the other boundary number by ␦ times the prize divided by the

   38
      In our working paper we assumed the distribution of the values of A jŽ0. came from a beta
distribution but the basic results were not much different. We also tried fitting asymmetric triangular
distributions, in which A100 Ž0. s 0, A50 Ž0. s c, A0 Ž0. s b, and A jŽ0. was piecewise linear between 0
and 50, and 50 and 100, with slopes Ž c y b .r50 and ycr50, respectively, and tried normal
distributions but the basic results were unchanged.
   39
      Since subjects were not told the winning number Žunless their number won., the fact that we
must assume they do to estimate the model could be considered a handicap for the EWA and
belief-based models, and a possible advantage for choice reinforcement, which does not require this
assumption.
864                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


number of winners. Losers reinforced both boundary numbers ␶ y d and ␶ q d
by ␦ times the prize, divided by the number of winners plus one.
   Implementing the belief model is not straightforward because subjects were
told only the target number, and whether they won, so they do not have enough
information to form beliefs about what other subjects will do, and use these
updated beliefs to calculate expected payoffs. Reinforcing numbers in some
intervals, as in the EWA updating, will not necessarily correspond to belief
learning based in information about all others’ numbers Žwhich they do not
know anyway.. As a result, we estimate a restricted form of EWA with belief-type
parameters by setting ␦ s 1, ␾ s ␳ , estimating initial belief counts in the
ten-number intervals, and taking initial expected payoffs to be normalized belief
counts multiplied by the prize. Numbers in the winning interval Ž␶ y d, ␶ q d . are
reinforced by one times the prize. This corresponds to a special kind of belief
learning in which players are learning what the target number will be and
best-responding given their beliefs.
   Table I reports overall results. Generally the fit is not very impressive; ␳ 2
values are only around 7%. In the calibration sample, EWA is slightly better
than reinforcement, which is better than the belief model. Out of sample, the
belief model and EWA model are about equally good Žand reinforcement is
clearly worst.; the belief model is slightly better on MSD and much worse in log
likelihood than EWA.
   Table VI reports results of parameter estimates.
   The EWA model fits the data as best it can in an odd way: It assumes there is
a general tendency to pick lower numbers, which grows stronger over time. This
can be seen in the initial attractions, which are largest for the lowest number
intervals,40 even though the first-period choices are clustered around 40᎐49 Ži.e.,
attraction category A5 Ž0... Then the model assumes these initial attractions
‘inflate’ over time Ž ␾ˆs 1.33.. The model is not capturing learning from experi-
ence well because lagged attractions are weighted heavily compared to payoff
reinforcement Ž Nˆ  Ž0. is 16.82., and the estimate ␦ˆ is small Ž.23..
   Choice reinforcement uses the same ingredientsᎏhigh initial attractions for
lower numbers, inflated by ␾ˆs 1.38ᎏbut fits substantially worse because N Ž0.
is forced to be one and there is little reinforcement from direct payoffs Žsince
most players lose and get nothing.. The belief model, in contrast, fits best by
assuming initial expected payoffs are highest for choices in the interval w40, 49x,
responding to payoff experience strongly Ž ␦ is fixed at one., and decaying
attractions fairly quickly Ž NˆŽ0. s 1.67 and ␾ˆs .40..
   The two-segment analysis of EWA improves calibration substantially, com-
pared to the one-segment model, and improves on the validation log-likelihood
modestly. The two-segment reinforcement and belief models add very little to
fit, especially in validation.

   40
      The exception is that attractions are high for the interval w90, 100x. This is to account for the
occasional outlying choices of 100, which are discussed at length in Ho, Camerer, and Weigelt
Ž1998..
                                  ATTRACTION LEARNING                                 865

                                            TABLE VI
                                 P-BEAUTY CONTESTS Ž Ms 1372.

                                                  Choice
         Parameters                EWA         Reinforcement    Belief-Based Models

         Initial values
           A1 Ž0. w N 1 Ž0.x       3.348          3.500           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.002.        Ž0.000.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A2 Ž0. w N 2 Ž0.x       3.311          3.240           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.002.        Ž0.002.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A3 Ž0. w N 3 Ž0.x       3.301          3.160           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.002.        Ž0.002.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A4 Ž0. w N 4 Ž0.x       3.269          2.891           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.001.        Ž0.002.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A5 Ž0. w N 5 Ž0.x       3.227          2.442           0.350 w0.167x
                                  Ž0.001.        Ž0.002.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A6 Ž0. w N 6 Ž0.x       3.180          2.006           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.001.        Ž0.001.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A7Ž0. w N 7Ž0.x         3.052          0.591           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.003.        Ž0.001.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A8 Ž0. w N 8 Ž0.x       2.912          0.000           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.006.        Ž0.000.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A9 Ž0. w N 9 Ž0.x       2.871          0.000           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.005.        Ž0.000.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
           A10 Ž0. w N 10 Ž0.x     3.060          0.700           0.000 w0.000x
                                  Ž0.004.        Ž0.001.         Ž0.000. w0.000x
              N Ž0.               16.815          1.000               1.672
                                  Ž0.000.        Ž0.000.             w0.002x
         Decay Parameters
            ␾                      1.330          1.375               0.402
                                  Ž0.004.        Ž0.002.             Ž0.001.
              ␳                    0.941          0.000               0.402
                                  Ž0.000.        Ž0.000.             Ž0.001.
         Imagination factor
            ␦                      0.232          0.000               1.000
                                  Ž0.013.        Ž0.000.             Ž0.000.
         Payoff sensitivity
             ␭                     2.579          0.223               0.942
                                  Ž0.002.        Ž0.002.             Ž0.001.
         Log-likelihood
              yLL                5878.197       5910.988            6083.036
              ␹2                                 65.582              409.679
           Ž p-value, dof.          ᎏ           Ž0.000,3.           Ž0.000,2.



   The two EWA segments that emerge Žnot reported in Table VI. are interest-
ing. The larger segment Ž66%. is very much like the one-segment EWA
estimate: Estimated initial attractions increase for smaller-number intervals, ␾ˆ
is 1.61, ␦ˆ is zero, and the experience weight NˆŽ0. is 16.83. The smaller segment
Ž34%. is remarkably like the one-segment belief model estimate: Initial attrac-
tions are highest for choices in the middle interval w50, 59x, ␾ˆ and ␳ˆ are small
and very close Ž.50 and .43., ␦ˆ is estimated to be 1.0, and Nˆ Ž0. s 1.76.
866                    COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


   None of these models captures the nature of learning well. The reinforcement
and one-segment EWA models simply pretend that the first period is like later
periods and inflate initial attractions to gradually reproduce the latter-period
data. Belief models converge too slowly.
   We think the results suggest two possible kinds of misspecification which we
plan to remedy in future research Žand have been studied by others..
   One possibility is that players detect trends and so, for example, use an
extrapolative rule of the form ‘‘expect that x Ž t q 1. is the same multiple of x Ž t .
that x Ž t . was of x Ž t y 1..’’ ŽOur model does not explicitly allow this since players
are assumed to use stage-game strategies only.. Such a model could be adaptive,
in the sense of using only past observations and neglecting information about
payoffs of others, but could allow subjects to choose strategies that are best
responses to behavior they have not observed before.
   Another possibility is this: Since these models are adaptive, they only use
information about previous payoffs Žincluding previous foregone payoffs.. Adap-
tive models of this sort cannot account for learning when players sophisticatedly
realize that other players are learning as well Žcf. Milgrom and Roberts Ž1991...
Our earlier work ŽHo, Camerer, and Weigelt Ž1998.. and Stahl Ž1996. showed
that a fraction of players seems to ‘iteratively best-respond’ in the sense that
they choose numbers that are not best responses to observed history Žas in
weighted fictitious play., but instead choose numbers that are best responses to
anticipated best-responding by others. Because the belief and reinforcement
models do not have this kind of sophistication, the hybrid EWA does not either.
Including sophistication in some parsimonious way may improve the fit.
   We are agnostic about whether the extrapolative or sophisticated approach is
generally better. There are empirical reasons to pursue both: Some experiments
have shown that players behave differently when they know the payoffs of others
Že.g., Partow and Schotter Ž1993.., indicating sophistication. Still other experi-
ments Žbesides p-beauty contests. suggest sensitivity to time trends or differ-
ences in previous results ŽHuck, Normann, and Oechssler Ž1997...



              5.5. Identification of Parameters and Model Diagnostics
   The results generally show that EWA fits better than either of the special
cases, both adjusting for extra parameters and predicting out of sample. A
further test for model specification is to ask whether there are regular correla-
tions among the three added parameters, ␦ N Ž0., and ␳ , and other parameters.
Because the EWA model is highly nonlinear, it is possible that certain parame-
ters covary so closely that it is difficult to identify them econometrically. ŽBy
definition, a nonidentified parameter could be dropped from the model without
reducing fit.. It is easy to show algebraically that the parameters are identified,
in the sense that for arbitrary data sets and MLE parameter estimates, no other
set of parameter values would fit equally well. However, it is possible that
parameters are nearly nonidentified in some data sets.
                                     ATTRACTION LEARNING                                           867

   One way to check the severity of nonidentifiability is to compute correlations
among parameter estimates across jackknife runs. Two parameters that cannot
be disentangled will be perfectly correlated across runs. Low or modest correla-
tions across runs indicate that parameters have detectably separate influences.
By inspecting the intercorrelations of the three important added parameters we
can check whether each parameter contributes to predictive power.
   A good overall statistic is the mean absolute correlation of the estimates of a
parameter with all the other parameters with which it might be misidentified.
We exclude initial attractions and compute correlations among ␾ , ␦ , ␳ , N Ž0.,
and ␭.
   For ␦ the mean absolute correlation with the other parameters is .31, .39, and
.23 across the constant-sum, median-action, and beauty-contest games. None of
the correlations with a specific parameter are consistent in magnitude and sign
across games. This indicates that ␦ is well-identified. The same statistics for
N Ž0. are .19, .22, and .32. The latter number excludes the correlation between
N Ž0. and ␳ in the beauty-contest game, which is nearly one because the
declining-effect constraint is binding.41 These figures show that N Ž0. is well-
identified too Žexcept when the constraint binds.. The mean absolute correla-
tions for ␳ are .48, .30, and .32 Žthe latter again excludes the high correlation
with N Ž0... These correlations are somewhat higher than for ␦ and N Ž0.,
especially in constant-sum games, indicating possible identification problems.
The most systematic large correlation is between ␳ and ␾ , which have an
average correlation of .88 in the constant-sum games Žand the correlations are
nearly equal in all four games.. They are also correlated .50 in the median-ac-
tion game and uncorrelated Žy.03. in the beauty contest game. This pattern of
correlations is a hint that the two depreciation parameters may be fundamen-
tally related, in some games, in a way we hope to explore in further research.
   The fact that the intercorrelations among estimates are modest and unsystem-
atic Žwith noted exceptions. confirms that the parameters added in EWA
contribute separately to its fit. We can also ask whether adding these parameters
helps solve identification problems that arise in the belief and reinforcement
special cases. For the reinforcement model, ␭ and ␾ are correlated y.79, y.68,
and .05 in the three classes of games. The large negative correlations arise
because when ␾ is lower attractions decay more rapidly, so ␭ must be larger to
magnify small differences in attractions into large differences in choice probabil-
ities. ŽThe same effect does not seem to happen across runs of the beauty-con-
test game, where ␾ˆ is 1.38 and none of the models captures learning well..
Therefore, it is difficult to identify separate influences of the two parameters.

  41
      When the declining-effect constraint N Ž0. F 1rŽ1 y ␳ . is binding, N Ž0. and ␳ are not identified
separately. ŽThe same is true in the belief model.. We regard this as a shred of evidence about the
way in which parameters may vary systematically across classes of games Žsee Cheung and Friedman
Ž1997... It may be that dominance-solvable games in which observed strategy choices are constantly
shifting location have this general property so the restriction N Ž0. s 1rŽ1 y ␳ . can be safely
imposed.
868                   COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


Adding ␳ and N Ž0. in the EWA model reduces the correlations between ␭ and
␾ in magnitude, to.15, y.40, and y.20, eliminating any possible identification
problem.
   In the belief model the only apparent identification problem is between N Ž0.
and ␾ , which are correlated .20, y.86, and .99 in the three games. When ␳ is
included in the EWA model, these correlations become .23, .31, and .99, so the
identification problem is partly eliminated.
   Overall, there are modest identification problems in all three models. Prob-
lems in the reinforcement and belief models are largely alleviated by introducing
␳ , N Ž0., and ␦ , in EWA. These new parameters are fairly well identified, except
for modest-to-strong correlation between ␳ and ␾ in two of three games. EWA
therefore solves minor identification problems in the simpler models at the
expense of creating another minor one, which could be explored in further
research.

                        6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
   We proposed a general ‘experience-weighted attraction’ ŽEWA. learning
model in which the probability of choosing a strategy is determined by its
relative attraction. A strategy’s attractions are updated by weighting lagged
attractions by the number of periods of ‘experience-equivalence’ they contain,
adding the payoffs actually received or a fraction of the payoffs that would have
been received, then normalizing by an experience weight.
   The paper makes two basic contributions.
   First, we show that belief learning is not fundamentally different from
reinforcement learning because both are special examples of one general
learning ruleᎏEWA. By showing their common basis, EWA lays bare the
essential components of reinforcement and belief learning, and shows how those
components can be combined to make a better model. Comparing choice
reinforcement to EWA makes it clear that reinforcement assumes players
ignore foregone payoffs, and attractions either cumulate as quickly as possible
Žin some models. or average past reinforcements Žin other models.. Comparing
weighted fictitious play to EWA makes it clear that belief models assume initial
attractions are consistent with prior beliefs, foregone and actual payoffs are
equally reinforcing, and attractions are weighted averages of past attractions and
payoffs.
   Indeed, as an empirical matter there is no reason to think that the clusters of
parametric restrictions embodied in cumulative choice reinforcement and
weighted fictitious play are the clusters most likely to arise in human behavior.
For example, there is no empirical reason to think that players who ignore
foregone payoffs also cumulate reinforcements, or that players who weight
foregone payoffs necessarily use weighted averages of past attractions. EWA
shows that there are many more clusters of parameter values than the two
special kinds embodied in cumulative reinforcement and weighted fictitious play.
For this reason, perhaps EWA should be studied more extensively in modern
empirical work before these special cases.
                             ATTRACTION LEARNING                                869

   Second, by estimating the more general EWA model, along with reinforce-
ment and belief-learning restrictions, our study combines methodological
strengths of earlier studies while avoiding weaknesses. All earlier studies did one
or more of the following: concentrated on only one or two models, focussed on
one class of games, ignored player heterogeneity, restricted the generality of
models, derived parameter values using methods that do not guarantee best-fits,
or did not report inferential statistics testing relative fit. Our paper had none of
these limits because we compared three general models, on three classes of
games, allowed some heterogeneity, derived parameter values optimally, and
reported both test statistics Žadjusting for free parameters three ways. and
out-of-sample predictive accuracy Žmeasured two ways..
   EWA fits better than the reinforcement models in all cases, and better than
belief learning in most cases, both adjusting for degrees of freedom within-sam-
ple and in out-of-sample prediction. Belief models are more accurate than
reinforcement in some games, and by some measures, and less accurate in
others.
   The foregone payoff weight ␦ is estimated to be .42 Žaveraging across the four
constant-sum games., .85 in median-action games, and .23 in beauty contests.
The raw average of these numbers, .50, suggests that players generally weight
foregone payoffs about half as much as actual payoffs. This result incorporates
the intuitions underlying both reinforcement Žactual payoffs are stronger. and
belief learning Žforegone payoffs matter.. Put differently, players seem to obey
both the law of actual effect and a corollary law of simulated effect.
   In the three games, the decay parameters ␾ and ␳ average 1.00 and .94, .80
and 0, and 1.33 and .94. The first two games indicate that sometimes attractions
are approximately averages Žas in belief models. and other times they cumulate
as rapidly as possible Žas in reinforcement .. The value of ␾ above one in beauty
contests, as discussed above, reflects a likely misspecification because the
adaptive models with stage-game strategies do not allow players to extrapolate
trends or have sophisticated beliefs Ža shortcoming the weighted fictitious play
and reinforcement models also share..
   The initial experience weight N Ž0. averages 15.80, .65, and 16.82. The large
values in constant-sum and beauty-contest games imply that players learn slowly,
because they give much more weight to lagged attractions than to payoffs. The
low value of .65 in median-action games means players respond more strongly to
payoffs, learning faster.
   EWA also exploits the flexibility of initial attractions shared by reinforcement
models, compared to belief models in which initial attractions must be expected
payoffs based on some prior. This flexibility is particularly helpful in the
coordination games.
   The results show how EWA is able to ‘gene-splice’ the best features of belief
and reinforcement learning while avoiding their weaknesses. For example, in the
median-action games players begin with dispersed choices that seem to reflect
different selection principles, and converge quickly. Explaining this pattern well
requires initial attractions that are flexible and cumulate Žas in reinforcement .,
870                        COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO


rather than belief-based initial attractions that are averages, but also requires
players to respond strongly to foregone payoffs Žas in belief learning..
  The fact that parameter values vary widely across the data sets is not
surprising, because all studies that have looked for differences in parameters
across games have found them Že.g., Crawford Ž1995., Cheung and Friedman
Ž1997., Erev and Roth Ž1997., Chen and Tang Ž1998... Furthermore, the parame-
ters capture different features of the dataᎏspeed of learning and sharpness of
convergence. Since these features are different across games, parameter values
should differ. Nonetheless, our understanding of learning will not be complete
until there is a theory of how parameter values depend on game structure and
experimental conditions Žsee Cheung and Friedman Ž1997. for important
progress.. Our estimates provide raw material for such theorizing.


                                     6.1. EWA Extensions
   There are many directions for future research.
   Theorizing about the kinds of equilibria to which EWA learning rules con-
verge would be extremely useful. Hart and Mas-Colell Ž1996. provide a clue.
They study a process in which players shift probability toward strategies they
wish they had played, in proportion to the difference between foregone and
actual payoffs Ž‘‘regret’’.. This process is similar to EWA learning because EWA
also shifts probability toward high-regret strategies when ␦ is close to one. Hart
and Mas-Collel prove that their process converges almost surely to correlated
equilibrium for finite normal-form games. Similar results might be derived for
EWA Žperhaps for a restricted class of games.. Interested theorists might keep
in mind that mapping attractions into probabilities using the ratio form means
the denominator of the updating equation vanishes, so ␳ disappears and the
experience weight only enters if the scale of the initial attractions is restricted.
Then the model can be sensibly reduced to two parametersᎏ ␦ and ␾ Žwhich
can be set to one for some theoretical purposes. ᎏwhich should make theorizing
easier.
   An empirical direction for further research is measurement of model parame-
ters using psychological methods. For example, if ␦ is interpreted as attention to
foregone payoffs from unchosen alternatives, then values of ␦ should correlate
with direct measures of attention, such as the amount of time subjects spend
looking at different numbers in a payoff matrix Žsee Camerer et al Ž1993... ŽIn
general, measuring attention to information provides a direct way to test
theories that assume certain kinds of information are not used.42 . Or if N Ž0. is

   42
      For example, choice reinforcement predicts that players do not use information other than their
own payoff history. Experiments that vary the information subjects are given have shown this
prediction is clearly wrong ŽMookerjhee and Sopher Ž1994., Van Huyck, Battalio, and Rankin Ž1996.,
Huck, Normann, Oechssler Ž1997... Direct measures of attention provide a more direct test: if
players look at foregone payoffs frequently, then reinforcement models have some explaining to do.
Similarly, all adaptive models predict that players do not use information about others’ payoffs;
looking at those payoffs is evidence of sophistication.
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                      871

the number of pregame ‘trials’ a player simulates that form prior beliefs, then
N Ž0. should be related to the ratio of initial response times to later-period
response times.
   EWA will also have to be upgraded to cope with three modelling
challengesᎏsophistication, imperfect payoff information, and specification of
strategiesᎏbefore it is generally applicable.
   Incorporating sophistication is important because EWA players only use
information about their opponents’ past choices, ignoring information about
payoffs of others. Using this information in an expanded learning rule that
incorporates sophistication could help explain data like those from the beauty-
contest games. Iterating sophistication might also link sophisticated-EWA to
equilibrium theories like quantal-response equilibrium.
   Incorporating imperfect payoff information is important because any general
model should be able to explain learning in low-information environments,
where players do not know everything about their own payoffs, opponents’
strategies, etc. EWA can obviously be applied in these settings by fixing ␦ s 0
Žwhich means EWA can apply to any environment choice to which reinforce-
ment applies.. A more general approach would use imperfect information in
some other way, rather than just giving it zero weight.
   Incorporating a richer specification of strategies is important because stage-
game strategies are not always the most natural candidates for the strategies
that players learn about. For example, players may learn by extrapolating from
sequences of observations, or learn about history-dependent repeated-game
strategies or a wide variety of decision rules Žlike minimax, Nash equilibrium, or
imitation; e.g., Stahl Ž1997... Once a set of richer strategies is specified, of
course, EWA can still model learning about those strategies. The open question,
therefore, is what rules to specify a priori, and how a model can winnow down a
very large set of possible rules as quickly as humans probably do.
   Adding these difficult extensions to EWA, and a theory of first-period play to
supply initial attractions, might eventually create a unified way to predict how
people play games in the lab and, eventually, how they play outside as well.

  Di¨ . of Social Sciences, 228᎐77, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, U.S.A.; camerer@hss.caltech.edu
                                         and
  Marketing Dept., The Wharton School, Philadelphia, PA 19104, U.S.A.;
hoteck@wharton.upenn.edu

               Manuscript recei¨ ed January, 1997; final re¨ ision recei¨ ed August, 1998.


                                           REFERENCES
ANDERSON, S., A. DE PALMA, AND J.᎐F. THISSE Ž1992.: Discrete Choice Theory of Product Differentia-
  tion. Cambridge: MIT Press.
ARTHUR, B. Ž1991.: ‘‘Designing Economic Agents That Act Like Human Agents: A Behavioral
  Approach to Bounded Rationality,’’ American Economic Re¨ iew Proceedings, 81, 353᎐359.
872                         COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO

BATTALIO, R., L. SAMUELSON, AND J. VAN HUYCK Ž1997.: ‘‘Risk Dominance, Payoff Dominance and
  Probabilistic Choice Learning,’’ Working Paper, Department of Economics, Texas A& M Univer-
  sity.
BEN ᎐AKIVA, M., AND S. LERMAN Ž1985.: Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Application to Tra¨ el
  Demand. Cambridge: MIT Press.
BEREBY ᎐MEYER, Y., AND I. EREV Ž1997.: ‘‘On Learning to Become a Successful Loser: A Compari-
  son of Alternative Abstractions of Learning Processes in the Loss Domain,’’ Working Paper,
  Technion᎐Israel Institute of Technology.
BOYLAN, R. T., AND M. A. EL ᎐GAMAL Ž1992.: ‘‘Fictitious Play: A Statistical Study of Multiple
  Economic Experiments,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 5, 205᎐222.
BORGERS, T., AND R. SARIN Ž1996.: ‘‘Naive Reinforcement Learning With Endogenous Aspirations,’’
  Working Paper, Texas A& M University.
BRANDTS, J., AND C. HOLT Žin press.: ‘‘Naive Bayesian Learning and Adjustment to Equilibrium in
  Signalling Games,’’ Journal of Economic Beha¨ ior and Organization, forthcoming.
BROSETA, B. Ž1995.: ‘‘Estimation of an Adaptive Learning Model in Experimental Coordination
  Games: An ARCHŽ1. Approach,’’ Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of
  Arizona.
BROWN, G. Ž1951.: ‘‘Iterative Solution of Games by Fictitious Play,’’ in Acti¨ ity Analysis of Production
  and Allocation. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
BUSH, R., AND F. MOSTELLER Ž1955.: Stochastic Models for Learning. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
CAMERER, C. F. Ž1997.: ‘‘Progress in Behavioral Game Theory,’’ Journal of Economic Perspecti¨ es,
  11, 167᎐188.
ᎏᎏᎏ Žin progress.: ‘‘Game Theory Experiments,’’ Manuscript in progress.
CAMERER, C. F., AND T.᎐H. HO Ž1998.: ‘‘EWA Learning in Games: Probability Form, Heterogene-
  ity, and Time Variation,’’ Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 42, 305᎐326.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1999.: ‘‘EWA Learning in Games: Preliminary Estimates from Weak-Link Games,’’ in
  Games and Human Beha¨ ior: Essays in Honor of Amnon Rapoport, ed. by D. Budescu, I. Erev, and
  R. Zwick. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc., Inc., 31᎐52.
CAMERER, C. F., E. JOHNSON, S. SEN, AND T. RYMON Ž1993.: ‘‘Cognition and Framing in Sequential
  Bargaining for Gains and Losses,’’ in Frontiers of Game Theory, ed. by K. Binmore, A. Kirman,
  and P. Tani. Cambridge: MIT Press, 27᎐48.
CARNAP, R. Ž1962.: The Logical Foundations of Probability Ž 2nd edition.. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.
CHEN, H., J. W. FRIEDMAN, AND J. F. THISSE Žin press.: Boundedly Rational Nash Equilibrium: A
  Probabilistic Choice Approach,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, forthcoming.
CHEN, Y., AND F᎐F. TANG Ž1998.: ‘‘Learning and Incentive Compatible Mechanisms for Public
  Goods Provision,’’ Journal of Political Economy, 106, 633᎐662.
CHEUNG, Y. W., AND D. FRIEDMAN Ž1997.: ‘‘Individual Learning in Normal Form Games: Some
  Laboratory Results,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 19, 46᎐76.
COOPER, D., S. GARVIN, AND J. KAGEL Žin press.: ‘‘Signaling and Adaptive Learning in an Entry
  Limit Pricing Game,’’ RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
COURNOT, A. Ž1960.: Recherches sur les Principes Mathematiques de la Theorie des Richesses.
  Translated into English by N. Bacon as Researches in the Mathematical Principles of the Theory
  of Wealth. London: Haffner.
CRAWFORD, V. P. Ž1995.: ‘‘Adaptive Dynamics in Coordination Games,’’ Econometrica, 63, 103᎐143.
CRAWFORD, V. P., AND B. BROSETA Ž1998.: ‘‘What Price Coordination? Auctioning the Right to Play
  as a Form of Preplay Communication,’’ American Economic Re¨ iew, 88, 198᎐225.
CROSS, J. G. Ž1983.: ‘‘A Theory of Adaptive Economic Behavior,’’ New YorkrLondon: Cambridge
  University Press.
DAVEY, G. C. L., AND G. MATCHETT Ž1994.: ‘‘Unconditioned Stimulus Rehearsal and the Retention
  and Enhancement of Differential ‘Fear’ Conditioning: Effects of Trait and State Anxiety,’’
  Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 708᎐718.
DUFFY, J., AND R. NAGEL Žin press.: ‘‘On the Robustness of Behavior in Experimental Guessing
  Games,’’ Economic Journal, forthcoming.
                                    ATTRACTION LEARNING                                          873

EREV, I., AND A. ROTH Ž1997.: ‘‘Predicting How People Play Games: Reinforcement Learning in
  Experimental Games with Unique, Mixed-Strategy Equilibria,’’ Working Paper, University of
  Pittsburgh.
EYSENCK, H. J Ž1979.: ‘‘The Conditioning Model of Neurosis,’’ Beha¨ ioral and Brain Sciences, 2,
  155᎐199.
FRIEDMAN, D. Ž1991.: ‘‘Evolutionary Games in Economics,’’ Econometrica, 59, 637᎐666.
FUDENBERG, D., AND D. K. LEVINE Ž1995.: ‘‘Consistency and Cautious Fictitious Play,’’ Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, 19, 1065᎐1090.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1998.: Theory of Learning in Games. Cambridge: MIT Press.
HARLEY, C. B. Ž1981.: ‘‘Learning the Evolutionary Stable Strategies,’’ Journal of Theoretical Biology,
  89, 611᎐633.
HART, S., AND A. MAS-COLEL Ž1996.: ‘‘A Simple Adaptive Procedure Leading to Correlated
  Equilibrium,’’ Hebrew University, Department of Economics, December.
HERRNSTEIN, J. R. Ž1970.: ‘‘On the Law of Effect,’’ Journal of Experimental Analysis of Beha¨ ior, 13,
  342᎐366.
HO, T᎐H., C. CAMERER, AND K. WEIGELT Ž1998.: ‘‘Iterated Dominance and Iterated Best-
  response in p-Beauty Contests,’’ American Economic Re¨ iew, 88, 947᎐969.
HO, T᎐H., AND K. WEIGELT Ž1996.: ‘‘Task Complexity, Equilibrium Selection, and Learning: An
  Experimental Study,’’ Management Science, 42, 659᎐679.
HUCK, S., H.᎐T. NORMANN, AND J. OECHSSLER Ž1997.: ‘‘Learning in Cournot OligopolyᎏAn
  Experiment,’’ Humboldt University, Department of Economics Working Paper.
MAJURE, W. R. Ž1994.: ‘‘Disequilibrium Game Theory,’’ Unpublished dissertation, Department of
  Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
MCALLISTER, P. H. Ž1991.: ‘‘Adaptive Approaches to Stochastic Programming,’’ Annals of Operations
  Research, 30, 45᎐62.
MCKELVEY, R. D., AND T. R. PALFREY Ž1995.: ‘‘Quantal Response Equilibria for Normal Form
  Games,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 10, 6᎐38.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1998.: ‘‘Quantal Response Equilibria for Extensive Form Games,’’ Experimental Economics,
  1, 9᎐41.
MILGROM, P., AND J. ROBERTS Ž1991.: ‘‘Adaptive and Sophisticated Learning in Repeated Normal
  Form Games,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 3, 82᎐100.
MOOKERJEE, D., AND B. SOPHER Ž1994.: ‘‘Learning Behavior in an Experimental Matching Pennies
  Game,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 7, 62᎐91.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1997.: ‘‘Learning and Decision Costs in Experimental Constant-sum Games,’’ Games and
  Economic Beha¨ ior, 19, 97᎐132.
NAGEL, R. Ž1995.: ‘‘Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,’’ American Economic
  Re¨ iew, 85, 1313᎐1326.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1999.: ‘‘A Review of Beauty Contest Games,’’ in Games and Human Beha¨ ior: Essays in
  Honor of Amnon Rapoport, ed. by D. Budescu, I. Erev, and R. Zwick. New Jersey: Lawrence
  Erlbaum Assoc., Inc., 105᎐142.
PARTOW, Z., AND A. SCHOTTER Ž1993.: ‘‘Does Game Theory Predict Well for the Wrong Reasons:
  An Experimental Investigation,’’ New York University C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics
  RR噛93᎐46, December.
ROTH, A. E. Ž1995.: ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Handbook of Experimental Economics, ed. by A. E. Roth and
  J. H. Kagel. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
ROTH, A., AND I. EREV Ž1995.: ‘‘Learning in Extensive-Form Games: Experimental Data and Simple
  Dynamic Models in the Intermediate Term,’’ Games and Economic Beha¨ ior, 8, 164᎐212.
SARIN, R. Ž1995.: ‘‘Learning Through Reinforcement: The Cross Model,’’ Working Paper, Depart-
  ment of Economics, Texas A& M University.
SARIN, R., AND F. VAHID Ž1997.: ‘‘Payoff Assessments Without Probabilities: Incorporating ‘Similar-
  ity’ Among Strategies,’’ Working Paper, Department of Economics, Texas A& M University.
SELTEN, R. Ž1991.: ‘‘Evolution, Learning, and Economic Behavior,’’ Journal of Risk Uncertainty, 3,
  3᎐24.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1997.: ‘‘Features of Experimentally Observed Bounded Rationality,’’ Universitat Bonn
  Sonderforschungsbereich 303, Discussion Paper No. B-421, November.
874                       COLIN CAMERER AND TECK ᎐ HUA HO

SELTEN, R., AND R. STOECKER Ž1986.: ‘‘End Behavior in Sequences of Finite Prisoner’s Dilemma
  Supergames,’’ Journal of Economic Beha¨ ior and Organization, 7, 47᎐70.
SMITH, A. Ž1981.: An Inquiry into Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Indianapolis: Liberty
  Classics.
STAHL, D. Ž1996.: ‘‘Boundedly Rational Rule Learning in a Guessing Game,’’ Games and Economic
  Beha¨ ior, 16, 303᎐330.
ᎏᎏᎏ Ž1997.: ‘‘Rule Learning in Symmetric Normal-Form Games: Theory and Evidence,’’ Working
  Paper, Department of Economics, University of Texas.
TANG, F. Ž1996.: ‘‘Anticipatory Learning in Two-person Games: An Experimental Study,’’ Working
  Paper, University of Bonn Working Paper.
THORNDIKE, E. L. Ž1911.: Animal Intelligence. New York: Macmillan.
TVERSKY, A., AND D. KAHNEMAN Ž1992.: ‘‘Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation
  of Uncertainty,’’ Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297᎐323.
VAN HUYCK, J., R. BATTALIO, AND R. BEIL Ž1990.: ‘‘Strategic Uncertainty, Equilibrium Selection,
  and Coordination Failure in Average Opinion Games,’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106,
  885᎐909.
VAN HUYCK, J., R. BATTALIO, AND F. W. RANKIN Ž1996.: ‘‘Selection Dynamics and Adaptive
  Behavior Without Much Information,’’ Working Paper, Department of Economics, Texas A & M
  University.
WEIBULL, J. W. Ž1997.: ‘‘What Have We Learned From Evolutionary Game Theory So Far?’’
  Stockholm School of Economics Research Institute of Industrial Economics Working Paper
  No. 487.
